
<h2><a id="page153"></a>VIII<br>
A CHAPTER ON DREAMS</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">The</span> past is all of one
texture—whether feigned or suffered—whether acted out
in three dimensions, or only witnessed in that small theatre of
the brain which we keep brightly lighted all night long, after
the jets are down, and darkness and sleep reign undisturbed in
the remainder of the body. There is no distinction on the
face of our experiences; one is vivid indeed, and one dull, and
one pleasant, and another agonising to remember; but which of
them is what we call true, and which a dream, there is not one
hair to prove. The past stands on a precarious footing;
another straw split in the field of metaphysic, and behold us
robbed of it. There is scarce a family that can count four
generations but lays a claim to some dormant title or some castle
and estate: a claim not prosecutable in any court of law, but
flattering to the fancy and a great alleviation of idle
hours. A man’s claim to his own past is yet less
valid. A paper might turn up (in proper story-book fashion)
in the secret drawer of an old ebony secretary, and restore your
family to its ancient honours, and reinstate mine in a certain
West Indian islet (not far from St. Kitt’s, as beloved
tradition hummed in my young ears) which was once ours, and is
now unjustly some one else’s, and for that matter (in the
state of the sugar trade) is not worth anything to anybody.
I do not say that these revolutions are likely; only no man can
deny that they are possible; and the past, on the other baud, is,
lost for ever: our old days and deeds, our old selves, too, and
the very world in which these scenes were acted, all brought down
to the same faint residuum as a last night’s dream, to some
incontinuous images, and an echo in the chambers of the
brain. Not an hour, not a mood, not a glance of the eye,
can we revoke; it is all gone, past conjuring. And yet
conceive us robbed of it, conceive that little thread of memory
that we trail behind us broken at the pocket’s edge; and in
what naked nullity should we be left! for we only guide
ourselves, and only know ourselves, by these air-painted pictures
of the past.</p>
<p>Upon these grounds, there are some among us who claim to have
lived longer and more richly than their neighbours; when they lay
asleep they claim they were still active; and among the treasures
of memory that all men review for their amusement, these count in
no second place the harvests of their dreams. There is one
of this kind whom I have in my eye, and whose case is perhaps
unusual enough to be described. He was from a child an
ardent and uncomfortable dreamer. When he had a touch of
fever at night, and the room swelled and shrank, and his clothes,
hanging on a nail, now loomed up instant to the bigness of a
church, and now drew away into a horror of infinite distance and
infinite littleness, the poor soul was very well aware of what
must follow, and struggled hard against the approaches of that
slumber which was the beginning of sorrows.</p>
<p>But his struggles were in vain; sooner or later the night-hag
would have him by the throat, and pluck him strangling and
screaming, from his sleep. His dreams were at times
commonplace enough, at times very strange, at times they were
almost formless: he would be haunted, for instance, by nothing
more definite than a certain hue of brown, which he did not mind
in the least while he was awake, but feared and loathed while he
was dreaming; at times, again, they took on every detail of
circumstance, as when once he supposed he must swallow the
populous world, and awoke screaming with the horror of the
thought. The two chief troubles of his very narrow
existence—the practical and everyday trouble of school
tasks and the ultimate and airy one of hell and
judgment—were often confounded together into one appalling
nightmare. He seemed to himself to stand before the Great
White Throne; he was called on, poor little devil, to recite some
form of words, on which his destiny depended; his tongue stuck,
his memory was blank, hell gaped for him; and he would awake,
clinging to the curtain-rod with his knees to his chin.</p>
<p>These were extremely poor experiences, on the whole; and at
that time of life my dreamer would have very willingly parted
with his power of dreams. But presently, in the course of
his growth, the cries and physical contortions passed away,
seemingly for ever; his visions were still for the most part
miserable, but they were more constantly supported; and he would
awake with no more extreme symptom than a flying heart, a
freezing scalp, cold sweats, and the speechless midnight
fear. His dreams, too, as befitted a mind better stocked
with particulars, became more circumstantial, and had more the
air and continuity of life. The look of the world beginning
to take hold on his attention, scenery came to play a part in his
sleeping as well as in his waking thoughts, so that he would take
long, uneventful journeys and see strange towns and beautiful
places as he lay in bed. And, what is more significant, an
odd taste that he had for the Georgian costume and for stories
laid in that period of English history, began to rule the
features of his dreams; so that he masqueraded there in a
three-cornered hat and was much engaged with Jacobite conspiracy
between the hour for bed and that for breakfast. About the
same time, he began to read in his dreams—tales, for the
most part, and for the most part after the manner of G. P. R.
James, but so incredibly more vivid and moving than any printed
book, that he has ever since been malcontent with literature.</p>
<p>And then, while he was yet a student, there came to him a
dream-adventure which he has no anxiety to repeat; he began, that
is to say, to dream in sequence and thus to lead a double
life—one of the day, one of the night—one that he had
every reason to believe was the true one, another that he had no
means of proving to be false. I should have said he
studied, or was by way of studying, at Edinburgh College, which
(it may be supposed) was how I came to know him. Well, in
his dream-life, he passed a long day in the surgical theatre, his
heart in his mouth, his teeth on edge, seeing monstrous
malformations and the abhorred dexterity of surgeons. In a
heavy, rainy, foggy evening he came forth into the South Bridge,
turned up the High Street, and entered the door of a tall
<i>land</i>, at the top of which he supposed himself to
lodge. All night long, in his wet clothes, he climbed the
stairs, stair after stair in endless series, and at every second
flight a flaring lamp with a reflector. All night long, he
brushed by single persons passing downward—beggarly women
of the street, great, weary, muddy labourers, poor scarecrows of
men, pale parodies of women—but all drowsy and weary like
himself, and all single, and all brushing against him as they
passed. In the end, out of a northern window, he would see
day beginning to whiten over the Firth, give up the ascent, turn
to descend, and in a breath be back again upon the streets, in
his wet clothes, in the wet, haggard dawn, trudging to another
day of monstrosities and operations. Time went quicker in
the life of dreams, some seven hours (as near as he can guess) to
one; and it went, besides, more intensely, so that the gloom of
these fancied experiences clouded the day, and he had not shaken
off their shadow ere it was time to lie down and to renew
them. I cannot tell how long it was that he endured this
discipline; but it was long enough to leave a great black blot
upon his memory, long enough to send him, trembling for his
reason, to the doors of a certain doctor; whereupon with a simple
draught he was restored to the common lot of man.</p>
<p>The poor gentleman has since been troubled by nothing of the
sort; indeed, his nights were for some while like other
men’s, now blank, now chequered with dreams, and these
sometimes charming, sometimes appalling, but except for an
occasional vividness, of no extraordinary kind. I will just
note one of these occasions, ere I pass on to what makes my
dreamer truly interesting. It seemed to him that he was in
the first floor of a rough hill-farm. The room showed some
poor efforts at gentility, a carpet on the floor, a piano, I
think, against the wall; but, for all these refinements, there
was no mistaking he was in a moorland place, among hillside
people, and set in miles of heather. He looked down from
the window upon a bare farmyard, that seemed to have been long
disused. A great, uneasy stillness lay upon the
world. There was no sign of the farm-folk or of any live
stock, save for an old, brown, curly dog of the retriever breed,
who sat close in against the wall of the house and seemed to be
dozing. Something about this dog disquieted the dreamer; it
was quite a nameless feeling, for the beast looked right
enough—indeed, he was so old and dull and dusty and
broken-down, that he should rather have awakened pity; and yet
the conviction came and grew upon the dreamer that this was no
proper dog at all, but something hellish. A great many
dozing summer flies hummed about the yard; and presently the dog
thrust forth his paw, caught a fly in his open palm, carried it
to his mouth like an ape, and looking suddenly up at the dreamer
in the window, winked to him with one eye. The dream went
on, it matters not how it went; it was a good dream as dreams go;
but there was nothing in the sequel worthy of that devilish brown
dog. And the point of interest for me lies partly in that
very fact: that having found so singular an incident, my
imperfect dreamer should prove unable to carry the tale to a fit
end and fall back on indescribable noises and indiscriminate
horrors. It would be different now; he knows his business
better!</p>
<p>For, to approach at last the point: This honest fellow had
long been in the custom of setting himself to sleep with tales,
and so had his father before him; but these were irresponsible
inventions, told for the teller’s pleasure, with no eye to
the crass public or the thwart reviewer: tales where a thread
might be dropped, or one adventure quitted for another, on
fancy’s least suggestion. So that the little people
who manage man’s internal theatre had not as yet received a
very rigorous training; and played upon their stage like children
who should have slipped into the house and found it empty, rather
than like drilled actors performing a set piece to a huge hall of
faces. But presently my dreamer began to turn his former
amusement of story-telling to (what is called) account; by which
I mean that he began to write and sell his tales. Here was
he, and here were the little people who did that part of his
business, in quite new conditions. The stories must now be
trimmed and pared and set upon all fours, they must run from a
beginning to an end and fit (after a manner) with the laws of
life; the pleasure, in one word, had become a business; and that
not only for the dreamer, but for the little people of his
theatre. These understood the change as well as he.
When he lay down to prepare himself for sleep, he no longer
sought amusement, but printable and profitable tales; and after
he had dozed off in his box-seat, his little people continued
their evolutions with the same mercantile designs. All
other forms of dream deserted him but two: he still occasionally
reads the most delightful books, he still visits at times the
most delightful places; and it is perhaps worthy of note that to
these same places, and to one in particular, he returns at
intervals of months and years, finding new field-paths, visiting
new neighbours, beholding that happy valley under new effects of
noon and dawn and sunset. But all the rest of the family of
visions is quite lost to him: the common, mangled version of
yesterday’s affairs, the raw-head-and-bloody-bones
nightmare, rumoured to be the child of toasted cheese—these
and their like are gone; and, for the most part, whether awake or
asleep, he is simply occupied—he or his little
people—in consciously making stories for the market.
This dreamer (like many other persons) has encountered some
trifling vicissitudes of fortune. When the bank begins to
send letters and the butcher to linger at the back gate, he sets
to belabouring his brains after a story, for that is his readiest
money-winner; and, behold! at once the little people begin to
bestir themselves in the same quest, and labour all night long,
and all night long set before him truncheons of tales upon their
lighted theatre. No fear of his being frightened now; the
flying heart and the frozen scalp are things by-gone; applause,
growing applause, growing interest, growing exultation in his own
cleverness (for he takes all the credit), and at last a jubilant
leap to wakefulness, with the cry, “I have it,
that’ll do!” upon his lips: with such and similar
emotions he sits at these nocturnal dramas, with such outbreaks,
like Claudius in the play, he scatters the performance in the
midst. Often enough the waking is a disappointment: he has
been too deep asleep, as I explain the thing; drowsiness has
gained his little people, they have gone stumbling and maundering
through their parts; and the play, to the awakened mind, is seen
to be a tissue of absurdities. And yet how often have these
sleepless Brownies done him honest service, and given him, as he
sat idly taking his pleasure in the boxes, better tales than he
could fashion for himself.</p>
<p>Here is one, exactly as it came to him. It seemed he was
the son of a very rich and wicked man, the owner of broad acres
and a most damnable temper. The dreamer (and that was the
son) had lived much abroad, on purpose to avoid his parent; and
when at length he returned to England, it was to find him married
again to a young wife, who was supposed to suffer cruelly and to
loathe her yoke. Because of this marriage (as the dreamer
indistinctly understood) it was desirable for father and son to
have a meeting; and yet both being proud and both angry, neither
would condescend upon a visit. Meet they did accordingly,
in a desolate, sandy country by the sea; and there they
quarrelled, and the son, stung by some intolerable insult, struck
down the father dead. No suspicion was aroused; the dead
man was found and buried, and the dreamer succeeded to the broad
estates, and found himself installed under the same roof with his
father’s widow, for whom no provision had been made.
These two lived very much alone, as people may after a
bereavement, sat down to table together, shared the long
evenings, and grew daily better friends; until it seemed to him
of a sudden that she was prying about dangerous matters, that she
had conceived a notion of his guilt, that she watched him and
tried him with questions. He drew back from her company as
men draw back from a precipice suddenly discovered; and yet so
strong was the attraction that he would drift again and again
into the old intimacy, and again and again be startled back by
some suggestive question or some inexplicable meaning in her
eye. So they lived at cross purposes, a life full of broken
dialogue, challenging glances, and suppressed passion; until, one
day, he saw the woman slipping from the house in a veil, followed
her to the station, followed her in the train to the seaside
country, and out over the sandhills to the very place where the
murder was done. There she began to grope among the bents,
he watching her, flat upon his face; and presently she had
something in her hand—I cannot remember what it was, but it
was deadly evidence against the dreamer—and as she held it
up to look at it, perhaps from the shock of the discovery, her
foot slipped, and she hung at some peril on the brink of the tall
sand-wreaths. He had no thought but to spring up and rescue
her; and there they stood face to face, she with that deadly
matter openly in her hand—his very presence on the spot
another link of proof. It was plain she was about to speak,
but this was more than he could bear—he could bear to be
lost, but not to talk of it with his destroyer; and he cut her
short with trivial conversation. Arm in arm, they returned
together to the train, talking he knew not what, made the journey
back in the same carriage, sat down to dinner, and passed the
evening in the drawing-room as in the past. But suspense
and fear drummed in the dreamer’s bosom. “She
has not denounced me yet”—so his thoughts
ran—“when will she denounce me? Will it be
to-morrow?” And it was not to-morrow, nor the next
day, nor the next; and their life settled back on the old terms,
only that she seemed kinder than before, and that, as for him,
the burthen of his suspense and wonder grew daily more
unbearable, so that he wasted away like a man with a
disease. Once, indeed, he broke all bounds of decency,
seized an occasion when she was abroad, ransacked her room, and
at last, hidden away among her jewels, found the damning
evidence. There he stood, holding this thing, which was his
life, in the hollow of his hand, and marvelling at her
inconsequent behaviour, that she should seek, and keep, and yet
not use it; and then the door opened, and behold herself.
So, once more, they stood, eye to eye, with the evidence between
them; and once more she raised to him a face brimming with some
communication; and once more he shied away from speech and cut
her off. But before he left the room, which he had turned
upside down, he laid back his death-warrant where he had found
it; and at that, her face lighted up. The next thing he
heard, she was explaining to her maid, with some ingenious
falsehood, the disorder of her things. Flesh and blood
could bear the strain no longer; and I think it was the next
morning (though chronology is always hazy in the theatre of the
mind) that he burst from his reserve. They had been
breakfasting together in one corner of a great, parqueted,
sparely-furnished room of many windows; all the time of the meal
she had tortured him with sly allusions; and no sooner were the
servants gone, and these two protagonists alone together, than he
leaped to his feet. She too sprang up, with a pale face;
with a pale face, she heard him as he raved out his complaint:
Why did she torture him so? she knew all, she knew he was no
enemy to her; why did she not denounce him at once? what
signified her whole behaviour? why did she torture him? and yet
again, why did she torture him? And when he had done, she
fell upon her knees, and with outstretched hands: “Do
you not understand?” she cried. “I love
you!”</p>
<p>Hereupon, with a pang of wonder and mercantile delight, the
dreamer awoke. His mercantile delight was not of long
endurance; for it soon became plain that in this spirited tale
there were unmarketable elements; which is just the reason why
you have it here so briefly told. But his wonder has still
kept growing; and I think the reader’s will also, if he
consider it ripely. For now he sees why I speak of the
little people as of substantive inventors and performers.
To the end they had kept their secret. I will go bail for
the dreamer (having excellent grounds for valuing his candour)
that he had no guess whatever at the motive of the
woman—the hinge of the whole well-invented plot—until
the instant of that highly dramatic declaration. It was not
his tale; it was the little people’s! And observe:
not only was the secret kept, the story was told with really
guileful craftsmanship. The conduct of both actors is (in
the cant phrase) psychologically correct, and the emotion aptly
graduated up to the surprising climax. I am awake now, and
I know this trade; and yet I cannot better it. I am awake,
and I live by this business; and yet I could not
outdo—could not perhaps equal—that crafty artifice
(as of some old, experienced carpenter of plays, some Dennery or
Sardou) by which the same situation is twice presented and the
two actors twice brought face to face over the evidence, only
once it is in her hand, once in his—and these in their due
order, the least dramatic first. The more I think of it,
the more I am moved to press upon the world my question: Who are
the Little People? They are near connections of the
dreamer’s, beyond doubt; they share in his financial
worries and have an eye to the bank-book; they share plainly in
his training; they have plainly learned like him to build the
scheme of a considerate story and to arrange emotion in
progressive order; only I think they have more talent; and one
thing is beyond doubt, they can tell him a story piece by piece,
like a serial, and keep him all the while in ignorance of where
they aim. Who are they, then? and who is the dreamer?</p>
<p>Well, as regards the dreamer, I can answer that, for he is no
less a person than myself;—as I might have told you from
the beginning, only that the critics murmur over my consistent
egotism;—and as I am positively forced to tell you now, or
I could advance but little farther with my story. And for
the Little People, what shall I say they are but just my
Brownies, God bless them! who do one-half my work for me while I
am fast asleep, and in all human likelihood, do the rest for me
as well, when I am wide awake and fondly suppose I do it for
myself. That part which is done while I am sleeping is the
Brownies’ part beyond contention; but that which is done
when I am up and about is by no means necessarily mine, since all
goes to show the Brownies have a hand in it even then. Here
is a doubt that much concerns my conscience. For
myself—what I call I, my conscious ego, the denizen of the
pineal gland unless he has changed his residence since Descartes,
the man with the conscience and the variable bank-account, the
man with the hat and the boots, and the privilege of voting and
not carrying his candidate at the general elections—I am
sometimes tempted to suppose he is no story-teller at all, but a
creature as matter of fact as any cheesemonger or any cheese, and
a realist bemired up to the ears in actuality; so that, by that
account, the whole of my published fiction should be the
single-handed product of some Brownie, some Familiar, some unseen
collaborator, whom I keep locked in a back garret, while I get
all the praise and he but a share (which I cannot prevent him
getting) of the pudding. I am an excellent adviser,
something like Molière’s servant; I pull back and I
cut down; and I dress the whole in the best words and sentences
that I can find and make; I hold the pen, too; and I do the
sitting at the table, which is about the worst of it; and when
all is done, I make up the manuscript and pay for the
registration; so that, on the whole, I have some claim to share,
though not so largely as I do, in the profits of our common
enterprise.</p>
<p>I can but give an instance or so of what part is done sleeping
and what part awake, and leave the reader to share what laurels
there are, at his own nod, between myself and my collaborators;
and to do this I will first take a book that a number of persons
have been polite enough to read, the <i>Strange Case of Dr.
Jekyll and Mr. Hyde</i>. I had long been trying to write a
story on this subject, to find a body, a vehicle, for that strong
sense of man’s double being which must at times come in
upon and overwhelm the mind of every thinking creature. I
had even written one, <i>The Travelling Companion</i>, which was
returned by an editor on the plea that it was a work of genius
and indecent, and which I burned the other day on the ground that
it was not a work of genius, and that <i>Jekyll</i> had
supplanted it. Then came one of those financial
fluctuations to which (with an elegant modesty) I have hitherto
referred in the third person. For two days I went about
racking my brains for a plot of any sort; and on the second night
I dreamed the scene at the window, and a scene afterward split in
two, in which Hyde, pursued for some crime, took the powder and
underwent the change in the presence of his pursuers. All
the rest was made awake, and consciously, although I think I can
trace in much of it the manner of my Brownies. The meaning
of the tale is therefore mine, and had long pre-existed in my
garden of Adonis, and tried one body after another in vain;
indeed, I do most of the morality, worse luck! and my Brownies
have not a rudiment of what we call a conscience. Mine,
too, is the setting, mine the characters. All that was
given me was the matter of three scenes, and the central idea of
a voluntary change becoming involuntary. Will it be thought
ungenerous, after I have been so liberally ladling out praise to
my unseen collaborators, if I here toss them over, bound hand and
foot, into the arena of the critics? For the business of
the powders, which so many have censured, is, I am relieved to
say, not mine at all but the Brownies’. Of another
tale, in case the reader should have glanced at it, I may say a
word: the not very defensible story of <i>Olalla</i>. Here
the court, the mother, the mother’s niche, Olalla,
Olalla’s chamber, the meetings on the stair, the broken
window, the ugly scene of the bite, were all given me in bulk and
detail as I have tried to write them; to this I added only the
external scenery (for in my dream I never was beyond the court),
the portrait, the characters of Felipe and the priest, the moral,
such as it is, and the last pages, such as, alas! they are.
And I may even say that in this case the moral itself was given
me; for it arose immediately on a comparison of the mother and
the daughter, and from the hideous trick of atavism in the
first. Sometimes a parabolic sense is still more undeniably
present in a dream; sometimes I cannot but suppose my Brownies
have been aping Bunyan, and yet in no case with what would
possibly be called a moral in a tract; never with the ethical
narrowness; conveying hints instead of life’s larger
limitations and that sort of sense which we seem to perceive in
the arabesque of time and space.</p>
<p>For the most part, it will be seen, my Brownies are somewhat
fantastic, like their stories hot and hot, full of passion and
the picturesque, alive with animating incident; and they have no
prejudice against the supernatural. But the other day they
gave me a surprise, entertaining me with a love-story, a little
April comedy, which I ought certainly to hand over to the author
of <i>A Chance Acquaintance</i>, for he could write it as it
should be written, and I am sure (although I mean to try) that I
cannot.—But who would have supposed that a Brownie of mine
should invent a tale for Mr. Howells?</p>
</div><!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
