
<h2><a id="page169"></a>IX<br>
BEGGARS</h2>
<h3>I</h3>
<p><span class="smcap">In</span> a pleasant, airy, up-hill
country, it was my fortune when I was young to make the
acquaintance of a certain beggar. I call him beggar, though
he usually allowed his coat and his shoes (which were
open-mouthed, indeed) to beg for him. He was the wreck of
an athletic man, tall, gaunt, and bronzed; far gone in
consumption, with that disquieting smile of the mortally stricken
on his face; but still active afoot, still with the brisk
military carriage, the ready military salute. Three ways
led through this piece of country; and as I was inconstant in my
choice, I believe he must often have awaited me in vain.
But often enough, he caught me; often enough, from some place of
ambush by the roadside, he would spring suddenly forth in the
regulation attitude, and launching at once into his
inconsequential talk, fall into step with me upon my farther
course. “A fine morning, sir, though perhaps a trifle
inclining to rain. I hope I see you well, sir. Why,
no, sir, I don’t feel as hearty myself as I could wish, but
I am keeping about my ordinary. I am pleased to meet you on
the road, sir. I assure you I quite look forward to one of
our little conversations.” He loved the sound of his
own voice inordinately, and though (with something too off-hand
to call servility) he would always hasten to agree with anything
you said, yet he could never suffer you to say it to an
end. By what transition he slid to his favourite subject I
have no memory; but we had never been long together on the way
before he was dealing, in a very military manner, with the
English poets. “Shelley was a fine poet, sir, though
a trifle atheistical in his opinions. His Queen Mab, sir,
is quite an atheistical work. Scott, sir, is not so
poetical a writer. With the works of Shakespeare I am not
so well acquainted, but he was a fine poet.
Keats—John Keats, sir—he was a very fine
poet.” With such references, such trivial criticism,
such loving parade of his own knowledge, he would beguile the
road, striding forward uphill, his staff now clapped to the ribs
of his deep, resonant chest, now swinging in the air with the
remembered jauntiness of the private soldier; and all the while
his toes looking out of his boots, and his shirt looking out of
his elbows, and death looking out of his smile, and his big,
crazy frame shaken by accesses of cough.</p>
<p>He would often go the whole way home with me: often to borrow
a book, and that book always a poet. Off he would march, to
continue his mendicant rounds, with the volume slipped into the
pocket of his ragged coat; and although he would sometimes keep
it quite a while, yet it came always back again at last, not much
the worse for its travels into beggardom. And in this way,
doubtless, his knowledge grew and his glib, random criticism took
a wider range. But my library was not the first he had
drawn upon: at our first encounter, he was already brimful of
Shelley and the atheistical Queen Mab, and
“Keats—John Keats, sir.” And I have often
wondered how he came by these acquirements; just as I often
wondered how he fell to be a beggar. He had served through
the Mutiny—of which (like so many people) he could tell
practically nothing beyond the names of places, and that it was
“difficult work, sir,” and very hot, or that
so-and-so was “a very fine commander, sir.” He
was far too smart a man to have remained a private; in the nature
of things, he must have won his stripes. And yet here he
was without a pension. When I touched on this problem, he
would content himself with diffidently offering me advice.
“A man should be very careful when he is young, sir.
If you’ll excuse me saying so, a spirited young gentleman
like yourself, sir, should be very careful. I was perhaps a
trifle inclined to atheistical opinions myself.” For
(perhaps with a deeper wisdom than we are inclined in these days
to admit) he plainly bracketed agnosticism with beer and
skittles.</p>
<p>Keats—John Keats, sir—and Shelley were his
favourite bards. I cannot remember if I tried him with
Rossetti; but I know his taste to a hair, and if ever I did, he
must have doted on that author. What took him was a
richness in the speech; he loved the exotic, the unexpected word;
the moving cadence of a phrase; a vague sense of emotion (about
nothing) in the very letters of the alphabet: the romance of
language. His honest head was very nearly empty, his
intellect like a child’s; and when he read his favourite
authors, he can almost never have understood what he was
reading. Yet the taste was not only genuine, it was
exclusive; I tried in vain to offer him novels; he would none of
them, he cared for nothing but romantic language that he could
not understand. The case may be commoner than we
suppose. I am reminded of a lad who was laid in the next
cot to a friend of mine in a public hospital and who was no
sooner installed than he sent out (perhaps with his last pence)
for a cheap Shakespeare. My friend pricked up his ears;
fell at once in talk with his new neighbour, and was ready, when
the book arrived, to make a singular discovery. For this
lover of great literature understood not one sentence out of
twelve, and his favourite part was that of which he understood
the least—the inimitable, mouth-filling rodomontade of the
ghost in <i>Hamlet</i>. It was a bright day in hospital
when my friend expounded the sense of this beloved jargon: a task
for which I am willing to believe my friend was very fit, though
I can never regard it as an easy one. I know indeed a point
or two, on which I would gladly question Mr. Shakespeare, that
lover of big words, could he revisit the glimpses of the moon, or
could I myself climb backward to the spacious days of
Elizabeth. But in the second case, I should most likely
pretermit these questionings, and take my place instead in the
pit at the Blackfriars, to hear the actor in his favourite part,
playing up to Mr. Burbage, and rolling out—as I seem to
hear him—with a ponderous gusto—</p>
<blockquote><div><p>“Unhousel’d, disappointed,
unanel’d.”</p>
</div></blockquote>
<p>What a pleasant chance, if we could go there in a party I and
what a surprise for Mr. Burbage, when the ghost received the
honours of the evening!</p>
<p>As for my old soldier, like Mr. Burbage and Mr. Shakespeare,
he is long since dead; and now lies buried, I suppose, and
nameless and quite forgotten, in some poor city
graveyard.—But not for me, you brave heart, have you been
buried! For me, you are still afoot, tasting the sun and
air, and striding southward. By the groves of Comiston and
beside the Hermitage of Braid, by the Hunters’ Tryst, and
where the curlews and plovers cry around Fairmilehead, I see and
hear you, stalwartly carrying your deadly sickness, cheerfully
discoursing of uncomprehended poets.</p>
<h3>II</h3>
<p>The thought of the old soldier recalls that of another tramp,
his counterpart. This was a little, lean, and fiery man,
with the eyes of a dog and the face of a gipsy; whom I found one
morning encamped with his wife and children and his
grinder’s wheel, beside the burn of Kinnaird. To this
beloved dell I went, at that time, daily; and daily the
knife-grinder and I (for as long as his tent continued pleasantly
to interrupt my little wilderness) sat on two stones, and smoked,
and plucked grass, and talked to the tune of the brown
water. His children were mere whelps, they fought and bit
among the fern like vermin. His wife was a mere squaw; I
saw her gather brush and tend the kettle, but she never ventured
to address her lord while I was present. The tent was a
mere gipsy hovel, like a sty for pigs. But the grinder
himself had the fine self-sufficiency and grave politeness of the
hunter and the savage; he did me the honours of this dell, which
had been mine but the day before, took me far into the secrets of
his life, and used me (I am proud to remember) as a friend.</p>
<p>Like my old soldier, he was far gone in the national
complaint. Unlike him, he had a vulgar taste in letters;
scarce flying higher than the story papers; probably finding no
difference, certainly seeking none, between Tannahill and Burns;
his noblest thoughts, whether of poetry or music, adequately
embodied in that somewhat obvious ditty,</p>
<blockquote><div><p>“Will ye gang, lassie, gang<br>
To the braes o’ Balquidder.”</p>
</div></blockquote>
<p>—which is indeed apt to echo in the ears of Scottish
children, and to him, in view of his experience, must have found
a special directness of address. But if he had no fine
sense of poetry in letters, he felt with a deep joy the poetry of
life. You should have heard him speak of what he loved; of
the tent pitched beside the talking water; of the stars overhead
at night; of the blest return of morning, the peep of day over
the moors, the awaking birds among the birches; how he abhorred
the long winter shut in cities; and with what delight, at the
return of the spring, he once more pitched his camp in the living
out-of-doors. But we were a pair of tramps; and to you, who
are doubtless sedentary and a consistent first-class passenger in
life, he would scarce have laid himself so open;—to you, he
might have been content to tell his story of a ghost—that
of a buccaneer with his pistols as he lived—whom he had
once encountered in a seaside cave near Buckie; and that would
have been enough, for that would have shown you the mettle of the
man. Here was a piece of experience solidly and livingly
built up in words, here was a story created, <i>teres atque
rotundus</i>.</p>
<p>And to think of the old soldier, that lover of the literary
bards! He had visited stranger spots than any seaside cave;
encountered men more terrible than any spirit; done and dared and
suffered in that incredible, unsung epic of the Mutiny War;
played his part with the field force of Delhi, beleaguering and
beleaguered; shared in that enduring, savage anger and contempt
of death and decency that, for long months together,
bedevil’d and inspired the army; was hurled to and fro in
the battle-smoke of the assault; was there, perhaps, where
Nicholson fell; was there when the attacking column, with hell
upon every side, found the soldier’s enemy—strong
drink, and the lives of tens of thousands trembled in the scale,
and the fate of the flag of England staggered. And of all
this he had no more to say than “hot work, sir,” or
“the army suffered a great deal, sir,” or “I
believe General Wilson, sir, was not very highly thought of in
the papers.” His life was naught to him, the vivid
pages of experience quite blank: in words his pleasure
lay—melodious, agitated words—printed words, about
that which he had never seen and was connatally incapable of
comprehending. We have here two temperaments face to face;
both untrained, unsophisticated, surprised (we may say) in the
egg; both boldly charactered:—that of the artist, the lover
and artificer of words; that of the maker, the seeër, the
lover and forger of experience. If the one had a daughter
and the other had a son, and these married, might not some
illustrious writer count descent from the beggar-soldier and the
needy knife-grinder?</p>
<h3>III</h3>
<p>Every one lives by selling something, whatever be his right to
it. The burglar sells at the same time his own skill and
courage and my silver plate (the whole at the most moderate
figure) to a Jew receiver. The bandit sells the traveller
an article of prime necessity: that traveller’s life.
And as for the old soldier, who stands for central mark to my
capricious figures of eight, he dealt in a specially; for he was
the only beggar in the world who ever gave me pleasure for my
money. He had learned a school of manners in the barracks
and had the sense to cling to it, accosting strangers with a
regimental freedom, thanking patrons with a merely regimental
difference, sparing you at once the tragedy of his position and
the embarrassment of yours. There was not one hint about
him of the beggar’s emphasis, the outburst of revolting
gratitude, the rant and cant, the “God bless you, Kind,
Kind gentleman,” which insults the smallness of your alms
by disproportionate vehemence, which is so notably false, which
would be so unbearable if it were true. I am sometimes
tempted to suppose this reading of the beggar’s part, a
survival of the old days when Shakespeare was intoned upon the
stage and mourners keened beside the death-bed; to think that we
cannot now accept these strong emotions unless they be uttered in
the just note of life; nor (save in the pulpit) endure these
gross conventions. They wound us, I am tempted to say, like
mockery; the high voice of keening (as it yet lingers on) strikes
in the face of sorrow like a buffet; and the rant and cant of the
staled beggar stirs in us a shudder of disgust. But the
fact disproves these amateur opinions. The beggar lives by
his knowledge of the average man. He knows what he is about
when he bandages his head, and hires and drugs a babe, and
poisons life with <i>Poor Mary Ann</i> or <i>Long</i>, <i>long
ago</i>; he knows what he is about when he loads the critical ear
and sickens the nice conscience with intolerable thanks; they
know what they are about, he and his crew, when they pervade the
slums of cities, ghastly parodies of suffering, hateful parodies
of gratitude. This trade can scarce be called an
imposition; it has been so blown upon with exposures; it flaunts
its fraudulence so nakedly. We pay them as we pay those who
show us, in huge exaggeration, the monsters of our
drinking-water; or those who daily predict the fall of
Britain. We pay them for the pain they inflict, pay them,
and wince, and hurry on. And truly there is nothing that
can shake the conscience like a beggar’s thanks; and that
polity in which such protestations can be purchased for a
shilling, seems no scene for an honest man.</p>
<p>Are there, then, we may be asked, no genuine beggars?
And the answer is, Not one. My old soldier was a humbug
like the rest; his ragged boots were, in the stage phrase,
properties; whole boots were given him again and again, and
always gladly accepted; and the next day, there he was on the
road as usual, with toes exposed. His boots were his
method; they were the man’s trade; without his boots he
would have starved; he did not live by charity, but by appealing
to a gross taste in the public, which loves the limelight on the
actor’s face, and the toes out of the beggar’s
boots. There is a true poverty, which no one sees: a false
and merely mimetic poverty, which usurps its place and dress, and
lives and above all drinks, on the fruits of the
usurpation. The true poverty does not go into the streets;
the banker may rest assured, he has never put a penny in its
hand. The self-respecting poor beg from each other; never
from the rich. To live in the frock-coated ranks of life,
to hear canting scenes of gratitude rehearsed for twopence, a man
might suppose that giving was a thing gone out of fashion; yet it
goes forward on a scale so great as to fill me with
surprise. In the houses of the working class, all day long
there will be a foot upon the stair; all day long there will be a
knocking at the doors; beggars come, beggars go, without stint,
hardly with intermission, from morning till night; and meanwhile,
in the same city and but a few streets off, the castles of the
rich stand unsummoned. Get the tale of any honest tramp,
you will find it was always the poor who helped him; get the
truth from any workman who has met misfortunes, it was always
next door that he would go for help, or only with such exceptions
as are said to prove a rule; look at the course of the mimetic
beggar, it is through the poor quarters that he trails his
passage, showing his bandages to every window, piercing even to
the attics with his nasal song. Here is a remarkable state
of things in our Christian commonwealths, that the poor only
should be asked to give.</p>
<h3>IV</h3>
<p>There is a pleasant tale of some worthless, phrasing
Frenchman, who was taxed with ingratitude: “<i>Il faut
savoir garder l’indépendance du
cœur</i>,” cried he. I own I feel with
him. Gratitude without familarity, gratitude otherwise than
as a nameless element in a friendship, is a thing so near to
hatred that I do not care to split the difference. Until I
find a man who is pleased to receive obligations, I shall
continue to question the tact of those who are eager to confer
them. What an art it is, to give, even to our nearest
friends! and what a test of manners, to receive! How, upon
either side, we smuggle away the obligation, blushing for each
other; how bluff and dull we make the giver; how hasty, how
falsely cheerful, the receiver! And yet an act of such
difficulty and distress between near friends, it is supposed we
can perform to a total stranger and leave the man transfixed with
grateful emotions. The last thing you can do to a man is to
burthen him with an obligation, and it is what we propose to
begin with! But let us not be deceived: unless he is
totally degraded to his trade, anger jars in his inside, and he
grates his teeth at our gratuity.</p>
<p>We should wipe two words from our vocabulary: gratitude and
charity. In real life, help is given out of friendship, or
it is not valued; it is received from the hand of friendship, or
it is resented. We are all too proud to take a naked gift:
we must seem to pay it, if in nothing else, then with the
delights of our society. Here, then, is the pitiful fix of
the rich man; here is that needle’s eye in which he stuck
already in the days of Christ, and still sticks to-day, firmer,
if possible, than ever: that he has the money and lacks the love
which should make his money acceptable. Here and now, just
as of old in Palestine, he has the rich to dinner, it is with the
rich that he takes his pleasure: and when his turn comes to be
charitable, he looks in vain for a recipient. His friends
are not poor, they do not want; the poor are not his friends,
they will not take. To whom is he to give? Where to
find—note this phase—the Deserving Poor?
Charity is (what they call) centralised; offices are hired;
societies founded, with secretaries paid or unpaid: the hunt of
the Deserving Poor goes merrily forward. I think it will
take more than a merely human secretary to disinter that
character. What! a class that is to be in want from no
fault of its own, and yet greedily eager to receive from
strangers; and to be quite respectable, and at the same time
quite devoid of self-respect; and play the most delicate part of
friendship, and yet never be seen; and wear the form of man, and
yet fly in the face of all the laws of human nature:—and
all this, in the hope of getting a belly-god Burgess through a
needle’s eye! O, let him stick, by all means: and let
his polity tumble in the dust; and let his epitaph and all his
literature (of which my own works begin to form no inconsiderable
part) be abolished even from the history of man! For a fool
of this monstrosity of dulness, there can be no salvation: and
the fool who looked for the elixir of life was an angel of reason
to the fool who looks for the Deserving Poor!</p>
<h3>V</h3>
<p>And yet there is one course which the unfortunate gentleman
may take. He may subscribe to pay the taxes. There
were the true charity, impartial and impersonal, cumbering none
with obligation, helping all. There were a destination for
loveless gifts; there were the way to reach the pocket of the
deserving poor, and yet save the time of secretaries! But,
alas! there is no colour of romance in such a course; and people
nowhere demand the picturesque so much as in their virtues.</p>
</div><!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
