
<h2><a id="page182"></a>X<br>
LETTER TO A YOUNG GENTLEMAN WHO PROPOSES TO EMBRACE THE CAREER OF
ART</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">With</span> the agreeable frankness of
youth, you address me on a point of some practical importance to
yourself and (it is even conceivable) of some gravity to the
world: Should you or should you not become an artist? It is
one which you must decide entirely for yourself; all that I can
do is to bring under your notice some of the materials of that
decision; and I will begin, as I shall probably conclude also, by
assuring you that all depends on the vocation.</p>
<p>To know what you like is the beginning of wisdom and of old
age. Youth is wholly experimental. The essence and
charm of that unquiet and delightful epoch is ignorance of self
as well as ignorance of life. These two unknowns the young
man brings together again and again, now in the airiest touch,
now with a bitter hug; now with exquisite pleasure, now with
cutting pain; but never with indifference, to which he is a total
stranger, and never with that near kinsman of indifference,
contentment. If he be a youth of dainty senses or a brain
easily heated, the interest of this series of experiments grows
upon him out of all proportion to the pleasure he receives.
It is not beauty that he loves, nor pleasure that he seeks,
though he may think so; his design and his sufficient reward is
to verify his own existence and taste the variety of human
fate. To him, before the razor-edge of curiosity is dulled,
all that is not actual living and the hot chase of experience
wears a face of a disgusting dryness difficult to recall in later
days; or if there be any exception—and here destiny steps
in—it is in those moments when, wearied or surfeited of the
primary activity of the senses, he calls up before memory the
image of transacted pains and pleasures. Thus it is that
such an one shies from all cut-and-dry professions, and inclines
insensibly toward that career of art which consists only in the
tasting and recording of experience.</p>
<p>This, which is not so much a vocation for art as an impatience
of all other honest trades, frequently exists alone; and so
existing, it will pass gently away in the course of years.
Emphatically, it is not to be regarded; it is not a vocation, but
a temptation; and when your father the other day so fiercely and
(in my view) so properly discouraged your ambition, he was
recalling not improbably some similar passage in his own
experience. For the temptation is perhaps nearly as common
as the vocation is rare. But again we have vocations which
are imperfect; we have men whose minds are bound up, not so much
in any art, as in the general <i>ars artium</i> and common base
of all creative work; who will now dip into painting, and now
study counterpoint, and anon will be inditing a sonnet: all these
with equal interest, all often with genuine knowledge. And
of this temper, when it stands alone, I find it difficult to
speak; but I should counsel such an one to take to letters, for
in literature (which drags with so wide a net) all his
information may be found some day useful, and if he should go on
as he has begun, and turn at last into the critic, he will have
learned to use the necessary tools. Lastly we come to those
vocations which are at once decisive and precise; to the men who
are born with the love of pigments, the passion of drawing, the
gift of music, or the impulse to create with words, just as other
and perhaps the same men are born with the love of hunting, or
the sea, or horses, or the turning-lathe. These are
predestined; if a man love the labour of any trade, apart from
any question of success or fame, the gods have called him.
He may have the general vocation too: he may have a taste for all
the arts, and I think he often has; but the mark of his calling
is this laborious partiality for one, this inextinguishable zest
in its technical successes, and (perhaps above all) a certain
candour of mind to take his very trifling enterprise with a
gravity that would befit the cares of empire, and to think the
smallest improvement worth accomplishing at any expense of time
and industry. The book, the statue, the sonata, must be
gone upon with the unreasoning good faith and the unflagging
spirit of children at their play. <i>Is it worth
doing</i>?—when it shall have occurred to any artist to ask
himself that question, it is implicitly answered in the
negative. It does not occur to the child as he plays at
being a pirate on the dining-room sofa, nor to the hunter as he
pursues his quarry; and the candour of the one and the ardour of
the other should be united in the bosom of the artist.</p>
<p>If you recognise in yourself some such decisive taste, there
is no room for hesitation: follow your bent. And observe
(lest I should too much discourage you) that the disposition does
not usually burn so brightly at the first, or rather not so
constantly. Habit and practice sharpen gifts; the necessity
of toil grows less disgusting, grows even welcome, in the course
of years; a small taste (if it be only genuine) waxes with
indulgence into an exclusive passion. Enough, just now, if
you can look back over a fair interval, and see that your chosen
art has a little more than held its own among the thronging
interests of youth. Time will do the rest, if devotion help
it; and soon your every thought will be engrossed in that beloved
occupation.</p>
<p>But even with devotion, you may remind me, even with
unfaltering and delighted industry, many thousand artists spend
their lives, if the result be regarded, utterly in vain: a
thousand artists, and never one work of art. But the vast
mass of mankind are incapable of doing anything reasonably well,
art among the rest. The worthless artist would not
improbably have been a quite incompetent baker. And the
artist, even if he does not amuse the public, amuses himself; so
that there will always be one man the happier for his
vigils. This is the practical side of art: its inexpugnable
fortress for the true practitioner. The direct
returns—the wages of the trade are small, but the
indirect—the wages of the life—are incalculably
great. No other business offers a man his daily bread upon
such joyful terms. The soldier and the explorer have
moments of a worthier excitement, but they are purchased by cruel
hardships and periods of tedium that beggar language. In
the life of the artist there need be no hour without its
pleasure. I take the author, with whose career I am best
acquainted; and it is true he works in a rebellious material, and
that the act of writing is cramped and trying both to the eyes
and the temper; but remark him in his study, when matter crowds
upon him and words are not wanting—in what a continual
series of small successes time flows by; with what a sense of
power as of one moving mountains, he marshals his petty
characters; with what pleasures, both of the ear and eye, he sees
his airy structure growing on the page; and how he labours in a
craft to which the whole material of his life is tributary, and
which opens a door to all his tastes, his loves, his hatreds, and
his convictions, so that what he writes is only what he longed to
utter. He may have enjoyed many things in this big, tragic
playground of the world; but what shall he have enjoyed more
fully than a morning of successful work? Suppose it ill
paid: the wonder is it should be paid at all. Other men
pay, and pay dearly, for pleasures less desirable.</p>
<p>Nor will the practice of art afford you pleasure only; it
affords besides an admirable training. For the artist works
entirely upon honour. The public knows little or nothing of
those merits in the quest of which you are condemned to spend the
bulk of your endeavours. Merits of design, the merit of
first-hand energy, the merit of a certain cheap accomplishment
which a man of the artistic temper easily acquires—these
they can recognise, and these they value. But to those more
exquisite refinements of proficiency and finish, which the artist
so ardently desires and so keenly feels, for which (in the
vigorous words of Balzac) he must toil “like a miner buried
in a landslip,” for which, day after day, he recasts and
revises and rejects—the gross mass of the public must be
ever blind. To those lost pains, suppose you attain the
highest pitch of merit, posterity may possibly do justice;
suppose, as is so probable, you fall by even a hair’s
breadth of the highest, rest certain they shall never be
observed. Under the shadow of this cold thought, alone in
his studio, the artist must preserve from day to day his
constancy to the ideal. It is this which makes his life
noble; it is by this that the practice of his craft strengthens
and matures his character; it is for this that even the serious
countenance of the great emperor was turned approvingly (if only
for a moment) on the followers of Apollo, and that sternly gentle
voice bade the artist cherish his art.</p>
<p>And here there fall two warnings to be made. First, if
you are to continue to be a law to yourself, you must beware of
the first signs of laziness. This idealism in honesty can
only be supported by perpetual effort; the standard is easily
lowered, the artist who says “<i>It will do</i>,” is
on the downward path; three or four pot-boilers are enough at
times (above all at wrong times) to falsify a talent, and by the
practice of journalism a man runs the risk of becoming wedded to
cheap finish. This is the danger on the one side; there is
not less upon the other. The consciousness of how much the
artist is (and must be) a law to himself, debauches the small
heads. Perceiving recondite merits very hard to attain,
making or swallowing artistic formulæ, or perhaps falling
in love with some particular proficiency of his own, many artists
forget the end of all art: to please. It is doubtless
tempting to exclaim against the ignorant bourgeois; yet it should
not be forgotten, it is he who is to pay us, and that (surely on
the face of it) for services that he shall desire to have
performed. Here also, if properly considered, there is a
question of transcendental honesty. To give the public what
they do not want, and yet expect to be supported: we have there a
strange pretension, and yet not uncommon, above all with
painters. The first duty in this world is for a man to pay
his way; when that is quite accomplished, he may plunge into what
eccentricity he likes; but emphatically not till then. Till
then, he must pay assiduous court to the bourgeois who carries
the purse. And if in the course of these capitulations he
shall falsify his talent, it can never have been a strong one,
and he will have preserved a better thing than
talent—character. Or if he be of a mind so
independent that he cannot stoop to this necessity, one course is
yet open: he can desist from art, and follow some more manly way
of life.</p>
<p>I speak of a more manly way of life, it is a point on which I
must be frank. To live by a pleasure is not a high calling;
it involves patronage, however veiled; it numbers the artist,
however ambitious, along with dancing girls and billiard
markers. The French have a romantic evasion for one
employment, and call its practitioners the Daughters of
Joy. The artist is of the same family, he is of the Sons of
Joy, chose his trade to please himself, gains his livelihood by
pleasing others, and has parted with something of the sterner
dignity of man. Journals but a little while ago declaimed
against the Tennyson peerage; and this Son of Joy was blamed for
condescension when he followed the example of Lord Lawrence and
Lord Cairns and Lord Clyde. The poet was more happily
inspired; with a better modesty he accepted the honour; and
anonymous journalists have not yet (if I am to believe them)
recovered the vicarious disgrace to their profession. When
it comes to their turn, these gentlemen can do themselves more
justice; and I shall be glad to think of it; for to my barbarian
eyesight, even Lord Tennyson looks somewhat out of place in that
assembly. There should be no honours for the artist; he has
already, in the practice of his art, more than his share of the
rewards of life; the honours are pre-empted for other trades,
less agreeable and perhaps more useful.</p>
<p>But the devil in these trades of pleasing is to fail to
please. In ordinary occupations, a man offers to do a
certain thing or to produce a certain article with a merely
conventional accomplishment, a design in which (we may almost
say) it is difficult to fail. But the artist steps forth
out of the crowd and proposes to delight: an impudent design, in
which it is impossible to fail without odious
circumstances. The poor Daughter of Joy, carrying her
smiles and finery quite unregarded through the crowd, makes a
figure which it is impossible to recall without a wounding
pity. She is the type of the unsuccessful artist. The
actor, the dancer, and the singer must appear like her in person,
and drain publicly the cup of failure. But though the rest
of us escape this crowning bitterness of the pillory, we all
court in essence the same humiliation. We all profess to be
able to delight. And how few of us are! We all pledge
ourselves to be able to continue to delight. And the day
will come to each, and even to the most admired, when the ardour
shall have declined and the cunning shall be lost, and he shall
sit by his deserted booth ashamed. Then shall he see
himself condemned to do work for which he blushes to take
payment. Then (as if his lot were not already cruel) he
must lie exposed to the gibes of the wreckers of the press, who
earn a little bitter bread by the condemnation of trash which
they have not read, and the praise of excellence which they
cannot understand.</p>
<p>And observe that this seems almost the necessary end at least
of writers. <i>Les blancs et les Bleus</i> (for instance)
is of an order of merit very different from <i>Le Vicomte de
Braglonne</i>; and if any gentleman can bear to spy upon the
nakedness of <i>Castle Dangerous</i>, his name I think is Ham:
let it be enough for the rest of us to read of it (not without
tears) in the pages of Lockhart. Thus in old age, when
occupation and comfort are most needful, the writer must lay
aside at once his pastime and his breadwinner. The painter
indeed, if he succeed at all in engaging the attention of the
public, gains great sums and can stand to his easel until a great
age without dishonourable failure. The writer has the
double misfortune to be ill-paid while he can work, and to be
incapable of working when he is old. It is thus a way of
life which conducts directly to a false position.</p>
<p>For the writer (in spite of notorious examples to the
contrary) must look to be ill-paid. Tennyson and
Montépin make handsome livelihoods; but we cannot all hope
to be Tennyson, and we do not all perhaps desire to be
Montépin. If you adopt an art to be your trade, weed
your mind at the outset of all desire of money. What you
may decently expect, if you have some talent and much industry,
is such an income as a clerk will earn with a tenth or perhaps a
twentieth of your nervous output. Nor have you the right to
look for more; in the wages of the life, not in the wages of the
trade, lies your reward; the work is here the wages. It
will be seen I have little sympathy with the common lamentations
of the artist class. Perhaps they do not remember the hire
of the field labourer; or do they think no parallel will
lie? Perhaps they have never observed what is the retiring
allowance of a field officer; or do they suppose their
contributions to the arts of pleasing more important than the
services of a colonel? Perhaps they forget on how little
Millet was content to live; or do they think, because they have
less genius, they stand excused from the display of equal
virtues? But upon one point there should be no dubiety: if
a man be not frugal, he has no business in the arts. If he
be not frugal, he steers directly for that last tragic scene of
<i>le vieux saltimbanque</i>; if he be not frugal, he will find
it hard to continue to be honest. Some day, when the
butcher is knocking at the door, he may be tempted, he may be
obliged, to turn out and sell a slovenly piece of work. If
the obligation shall have arisen through no wantonness of his
own, he is even to be commanded; for words cannot describe how
far more necessary it is that a man should support his family,
than that he should attain to—or preserve—distinction
in the arts. But if the pressure comes, through his own
fault, he has stolen, and stolen under trust, and stolen (which
is the worst of all) in such a way that no law can reach him.</p>
<p>And now you may perhaps ask me, if the débutant artist
is to have no thought of money, and if (as is implied) he is to
expect no honours from the State, he may not at least look
forward to the delights of popularity? Praise, you will
tell me, is a savoury dish. And in so far as you may mean
the countenance of other artists you would put your finger on one
of the most essential and enduring pleasures of the career of
art. But in so far as you should have an eye to the
commendations of the public or the notice of the newspapers, be
sure you would but be cherishing a dream. It is true that
in certain esoteric journals the author (for instance) is duly
criticised, and that he is often praised a great deal more than
he deserves, sometimes for qualities which he prided himself on
eschewing, and sometimes by ladies and gentlemen who have denied
themselves the privilege of reading his work. But if a man
be sensitive to this wild praise, we must suppose him equally
alive to that which often accompanies and always follows
it—wild ridicule. A man may have done well for years,
and then he may fail; he will hear of his failure. Or he
may have done well for years, and still do well, but the critics
may have tired of praising him, or there may have sprung up some
new idol of the instant, some “dust a little gilt,”
to whom they now prefer to offer sacrifice. Here is the
obverse and the reverse of that empty and ugly thing called
popularity. Will any man suppose it worth the gaining?</p>
</div><!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
