
<h2><a id="page193"></a>XI<br>
PULVIS ET UMBRA</h2>
<p><span class="smcap">We</span> look for some reward of our
endeavours and are disappointed; not success, not happiness, not
even peace of conscience, crowns our ineffectual efforts to do
well. Our frailties are invincible, our virtues barren; the
battle goes sore against us to the going down of the sun.
The canting moralist tells us of right and wrong; and we look
abroad, even on the face of our small earth, and find them change
with every climate, and no country where some action is not
honoured for a virtue and none where it is not branded for a
vice; and we look in our experience, and find no vital congruity
in the wisest rules, but at the best a municipal fitness.
It is not strange if we are tempted to despair of good. We
ask too much. Our religions and moralities have been
trimmed to flatter us, till they are all emasculate and
sentimentalised, and only please and weaken. Truth is of a
rougher strain. In the harsh face of life, faith can read a
bracing gospel. The human race is a thing more ancient than
the ten commandments; and the bones and revolutions of the
Kosmos, in whose joints we are but moss and fungus, more ancient
still.</p>
<h3>I</h3>
<p>Of the Kosmos in the last resort, science reports many
doubtful things and all of them appalling. There seems no
substance to this solid globe on which we stamp: nothing but
symbols and ratios. Symbols and ratios carry us and bring
us forth and beat us down; gravity that swings the
incommensurable suns and worlds through space, is but a figment
varying inversely as the squares of distances; and the suns and
worlds themselves, imponderable figures of abstraction,
NH<sub>3</sub>, and H<sub>2</sub>O. Consideration dares not
dwell upon this view; that way madness lies; science carries us
into zones of speculation, where there is no habitable city for
the mind of man.</p>
<p>But take the Kosmos with a grosser faith, as our senses give
it us. We behold space sown with rotatory islands, suns and
worlds and the shards and wrecks of systems: some, like the sun,
still blazing; some rotting, like the earth; others, like the
moon, stable in desolation. All of these we take to be made
of something we call matter: a thing which no analysis can help
us to conceive; to whose incredible properties no familiarity can
reconcile our minds. This stuff, when not purified by the
lustration of fire, rots uncleanly into something we call life;
seized through all its atoms with a pediculous malady; swelling
in tumours that become independent, sometimes even (by an
abhorrent prodigy) locomotory; one splitting into millions,
millions cohering into one, as the malady proceeds through
varying stages. This vital putrescence of the dust, used as
we are to it, yet strikes us with occasional disgust, and the
profusion of worms in a piece of ancient turf, or the air of a
marsh darkened with insects, will sometimes check our breathing
so that we aspire for cleaner places. But none is clean:
the moving sand is infected with lice; the pure spring, where it
bursts out of the mountain, is a mere issue of worms; even in the
hard rock the crystal is forming.</p>
<p>In two main shapes this eruption covers the countenance of the
earth: the animal and the vegetable: one in some degree the
inversion of the other: the second rooted to the spot; the first
coming detached out of its natal mud, and scurrying abroad with
the myriad feet of insects or towering into the heavens on the
wings of birds: a thing so inconceivable that, if it be well
considered, the heart stops. To what passes with the
anchored vermin, we have little clue, doubtless they have their
joys and sorrows, their delights and killing agonies: it appears
not how. But of the locomotory, to which we ourselves
belong, we can tell more. These share with us a thousand
miracles: the miracles of sight, of hearing, of the projection of
sound, things that bridge space; the miracles of memory and
reason, by which the present is conceived, and when it is gone,
its image kept living in the brains of man and brute; the miracle
of reproduction, with its imperious desires and staggering
consequences. And to put the last touch upon this mountain
mass of the revolting and the inconceivable, all these prey upon
each other, lives tearing other lives in pieces, cramming them
inside themselves, and by that summary process, growing fat: the
vegetarian, the whale, perhaps the tree, not less than the lion
of the desert; for the vegetarian is only the eater of the
dumb.</p>
<p>Meanwhile our rotatory island loaded with predatory life, and
more drenched with blood, both animal and vegetable, than ever
mutinied ship, scuds through space with unimaginable speed, and
turns alternate cheeks to the reverberation of a blazing world,
ninety million miles away.</p>
<h3>II</h3>
<p>What a monstrous spectre is this man, the disease of the
agglutinated dust, lifting alternate feet or lying drugged with
slumber; killing, feeding, growing, bringing forth small copies
of himself; grown upon with hair like grass, fitted with eyes
that move and glitter in his face; a thing to set children
screaming;—and yet looked at nearlier, known as his fellows
know him, how surprising are his attributes! Poor soul,
here for so little, cast among so many hardships, filled with
desires so incommensurate and so inconsistent, savagely
surrounded, savagely descended, irremediably condemned to prey
upon his fellow lives: who should have blamed him had he been of
a piece with his destiny and a being merely barbarous? And
we look and behold him instead filled with imperfect virtues:
infinitely childish, often admirably valiant, often touchingly
kind; sitting down, amidst his momentary life, to debate of right
and wrong and the attributes of the deity; rising up to do battle
for an egg or die for an idea; singling out his friends and his
mate with cordial affection; bringing forth in pain, rearing with
long-suffering solicitude, his young. To touch the heart of
his mystery, we find, in him one thought, strange to the point of
lunacy: the thought of duty; the thought of something owing to
himself, to his neighbour, to his God: an ideal of decency, to
which he would rise if it were possible; a limit of shame, below
which, if it be possible, he will not stoop. The design in
most men is one of conformity; here and there, in picked natures,
it transcends itself and soars on the other side, arming martyrs
with independence; but in all, in their degrees, it is a bosom
thought:—Not in man alone, for we trace it in dogs and cats
whom we know fairly well, and doubtless some similar point of
honour sways the elephant, the oyster, and the louse, of whom we
know so little:—But in man, at least, it sways with so
complete an empire that merely selfish things come second, even
with the selfish: that appetites are starved, fears are
conquered, pains supported; that almost the dullest shrinks from
the reproof of a glance, although it were a child’s; and
all but the most cowardly stand amid the risks of war; and the
more noble, having strongly conceived an act as due to their
ideal, affront and embrace death. Strange enough if, with
their singular origin and perverted practice, they think they are
to be rewarded in some future life: stranger still, if they are
persuaded of the contrary, and think this blow, which they
solicit, will strike them senseless for eternity. I shall
be reminded what a tragedy of misconception and misconduct man at
large presents: of organised injustice, cowardly violence and
treacherous crime; and of the damning imperfections of the
best. They cannot be too darkly drawn. Man is indeed
marked for failure in his efforts to do right. But where
the best consistently miscarry, how tenfold more remarkable that
all should continue to strive; and surely we should find it both
touching and inspiriting, that in a field from which success is
banished, our race should not cease to labour.</p>
<p>If the first view of this creature, stalking in his rotatory
isle, be a thing to shake the courage of the stoutest, on this
nearer sight, he startles us with an admiring wonder. It
matters not where we look, under what climate we observe him, in
what stage of society, in what depth of ignorance, burthened with
what erroneous morality; by camp-fires in Assiniboia, the snow
powdering his shoulders, the wind plucking his blanket, as he
sits, passing the ceremonial calumet and uttering his grave
opinions like a Roman senator; in ships at sea, a man inured to
hardship and vile pleasures, his brightest hope a fiddle in a
tavern and a bedizened trull who sells herself to rob him, and he
for all that simple, innocent, cheerful, kindly like a child,
constant to toil, brave to drown, for others; in the slums of
cities, moving among indifferent millions to mechanical
employments, without hope of change in the future, with scarce a
pleasure in the present, and yet true to his virtues, honest up
to his lights, kind to his neighbours, tempted perhaps in vain by
the bright gin-palace, perhaps long-suffering with the drunken
wife that ruins him; in India (a woman this time) kneeling with
broken cries and streaming tears, as she drowns her child in the
sacred river; in the brothel, the discard of society, living
mainly on strong drink, fed with affronts, a fool, a thief, the
comrade of thieves, and even here keeping the point of honour and
the touch of pity, often repaying the world’s scorn with
service, often standing firm upon a scruple, and at a certain
cost, rejecting riches:—everywhere some virtue cherished or
affected, everywhere some decency of thought and carriage,
everywhere the ensign of man’s ineffectual
goodness:—ah! if I could show you this! if I could show you
these men and women, all the world over, in every stage of
history, under every abuse of error, under every circumstance of
failure, without hope, without help, without thanks, still
obscurely fighting the lost fight of virtue, still clinging, in
the brothel or on the scaffold, to some rag of honour, the poor
jewel of their souls! They may seek to escape, and yet they
cannot; it is not alone their privilege and glory, but their
doom; they are condemned to some nobility; all their lives long,
the desire of good is at their heels, the implacable hunter.</p>
<p>Of all earth’s meteors, here at least is the most
strange and consoling: that this ennobled lemur, this
hair-crowned bubble of the dust, this inheritor of a few years
and sorrows, should yet deny himself his rare delights, and add
to his frequent pains, and live for an ideal, however
misconceived. Nor can we stop with man. A new
doctrine, received with screams a little while ago by canting
moralists, and still not properly worked into the body of our
thoughts, lights us a step farther into the heart of this rough
but noble universe. For nowadays the pride of man denies in
vain his kinship with the original dust. He stands no
longer like a thing apart. Close at his heels we see the
dog, prince of another genus: and in him too, we see dumbly
testified the same cultus of an unattainable ideal, the same
constancy in failure. Does it stop with the dog? We
look at our feet where the ground is blackened with the swarming
ant: a creature so small, so far from us in the hierarchy of
brutes, that we can scarce trace and scarce comprehend his
doings; and here also, in his ordered politics and rigorous
justice, we see confessed the law of duty and the fact of
individual sin. Does it stop, then, with the ant?
Rather this desire of well-doing and this doom of frailty run
through all the grades of life: rather is this earth, from the
frosty top of Everest to the next margin of the internal fire,
one stage of ineffectual virtues and one temple of pious tears
and perseverance. The whole creation groaneth and
travaileth together. It is the common and the god-like law
of life. The browsers, the biters, the barkers, the hairy
coats of field and forest, the squirrel in the oak, the
thousand-footed creeper in the dust, as they share with us the
gift of life, share with us the love of an ideal: strive like
us—like us are tempted to grow weary of the
struggle—to do well; like us receive at times unmerited
refreshment, visitings of support, returns of courage; and are
condemned like us to be crucified between that double law of the
members and the will. Are they like us, I wonder, in the
timid hope of some reward, some sugar with the drug? do they,
too, stand aghast at unrewarded virtues, at the sufferings of
those whom, in our partiality, we take to be just, and the
prosperity of such as, in our blindness, we call wicked? It
may be, and yet God knows what they should look for. Even
while they look, even while they repent, the foot of man treads
them by thousands in the dust, the yelping hounds burst upon
their trail, the bullet speeds, the knives are heating in the den
of the vivisectionist; or the dew falls, and the generation of a
day is blotted out. For these are creatures, compared with
whom our weakness is strength, our ignorance wisdom, our brief
span eternity.</p>
<p>And as we dwell, we living things, in our isle of terror and
under the imminent hand of death, God forbid it should be man the
erected, the reasoner, the wise in his own eyes—God forbid
it should be man that wearies in well-doing, that despairs of
unrewarded effort, or utters the language of complaint. Let
it be enough for faith, that the whole creation groans in mortal
frailty, strives with unconquerable constancy: Surely not all in
vain.</p>
</div><!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
