
<h2><!-- page 189--><a id="page189"></a><span class="pagenum">p. 189</span>VII.<br>
RANDOM MEMORIES: <i>ROSA QUO LOCORUM</i></h2>
<p>Through what little channels, by what hints and premonitions,
the consciousness of the man’s art dawns first upon the
child, it should be not only interesting but instructive to
inquire.  A matter of curiosity to-day, it will become the
ground of science to-morrow.  From the mind of childhood
there is more history and more philosophy to be fished up than
from all the printed volumes in a library.  The child is
conscious of an interest, not in literature but in life.  A
taste for the precise, the adroit, or the comely in the use of
words, comes late; but long before that he has enjoyed in books a
delightful dress rehearsal of experience.  He is first
conscious of this material—I had almost said this
practical—pre-occupation; it does not follow that it really
came the first.  I have some old fogged negatives in my
collection that would seem to imply a prior stage ‘The Lord
is gone up with a shout, and God with the sound of a
trumpet’—memorial version, I know not where to find
the text—rings still in my ear from my first childhood, and
perhaps with something of my nurses accent.  There was
possibly some sort of image written in my mind by these loud
words, but I believe the words themselves were what I
cherished.  I had about the same time, and under the same
influence—that of my dear nurse—a favourite author:
it is possible the reader has not heard of him—the Rev.
Robert Murray M’Cheyne.  My nurse and I admired his
name exceedingly, so that I must have been taught the love of
beautiful sounds before I was breeched; and I remember two
specimens of his muse until this day:—</p>
<blockquote><div><p>‘Behind the hills of Naphtali<br>
   The sun went slowly down,<br>
Leaving on mountain, tower, and tree,<br>
   A tinge of golden brown.’</p>
</div></blockquote>
<p>There is imagery here, and I set it on one side.  The
other—it is but a verse—not only contains no image,
but is quite unintelligible even to my comparatively instructed
mind, and I know not even how to spell the outlandish vocable
that charmed me in my childhood:</p>
<blockquote><div><p>‘Jehovah Tschidkenu is nothing to
her’;—<a id="citation190"></a><a class="citation pginternal" href="#footnote190">[190]</a></p>
</div></blockquote>
<p>I may say, without flippancy, that he was nothing to me
either, since I had no ray of a guess of what he was about; yet
the verse, from then to now, a longer interval than the life of a
generation, has continued to haunt me.</p>
<p>I have said that I should set a passage distinguished by
obvious and pleasing imagery, however faint; for the child thinks
much in images, words are very live to him, phrases that imply a
picture eloquent beyond their value.  Rummaging in the dusty
pigeon-holes of memory, I came once upon a graphic version of the
famous Psalm, ‘The Lord is my shepherd’: and from the
places employed in its illustration, which are all in the
immediate neighbourhood of a house then occupied by my father, I
am able, to date it before the seventh year of my age, although
it was probably earlier in fact.  The ‘pastures
green’ were represented by a certain suburban
stubble-field, where I had once walked with my nurse, under an
autumnal sunset, on the banks of the Water of Leith: the place is
long ago built up; no pastures now, no stubble-fields; only a
maze of little streets and smoking chimneys and shrill
children.  Here, in the fleecy person of a sheep, I seemed
to myself to follow something unseen, unrealised, and yet
benignant; and close by the sheep in which I was
incarnated—as if for greater security—rustled the
skirt, of my nurse.  ‘Death’s dark vale’
was a certain archway in the Warriston Cemetery: a formidable yet
beloved spot, for children love to be afraid,—in measure as
they love all experience of vitality.  Here I beheld myself
some paces ahead (seeing myself, I mean, from behind) utterly
alone in that uncanny passage; on the one side of me a rude,
knobby, shepherd’s staff, such as cheers the heart of the
cockney tourist, on the other a rod like a billiard cue, appeared
to accompany my progress; the stiff sturdily upright, the
billiard cue inclined confidentially, like one whispering,
towards my ear.  I was aware—I will never tell you
how—that the presence of these articles afforded me
encouragement.  The third and last of my pictures
illustrated words:—</p>
<blockquote><div><p>‘My table Thou hast furnished<br>
   In presence of my foes:<br>
My head Thou dost with oil anoint,<br>
   And my cup overflows’:</p>
</div></blockquote>
<p>and this was perhaps the most interesting of the series. 
I saw myself seated in a kind of open stone summer-house at
table; over my shoulder a hairy, bearded, and robed presence
anointed me from an authentic shoe-horn; the summer-house was
part of the green court of a ruin, and from the far side of the
court black and white imps discharged against me ineffectual
arrows.  The picture appears arbitrary, but I can trace
every detail to its source, as Mr. Brock analysed the dream of
Alan Armadale.  The summer-house and court were muddled
together out of Billings’ <i>Antiquities of Scotland</i>;
the imps conveyed from Bagster’s <i>Pilgrim’s
Progress</i>; the bearded and robed figure from any one of the
thousand Bible pictures; and the shoe-horn was plagiarised from
an old illustrated Bible, where it figured in the hand of Samuel
anointing Saul, and had been pointed out to me as a jest by my
father.  It was shown me for a jest, remark; but the serious
spirit of infancy adopted it in earnest.  Children are all
classics; a bottle would have seemed an intermediary too
trivial—that divine refreshment of whose meaning I had no
guess; and I seized on the idea of that mystic shoe-horn with
delight, even as, a little later, I should have written flagon,
chalice, hanaper, beaker, or any word that might have appealed to
me at the moment as least contaminate with mean
associations.  In this string of pictures I believe the gist
of the psalm to have consisted; I believe it had no more to say
to me; and the result was consolatory.  I would go to sleep
dwelling with restfulness upon these images; they passed before
me, besides, to an appropriate music; for I had already singled
out from that rude psalm the one lovely verse which dwells in the
minds of all, not growing old, not disgraced by its association
with long Sunday tasks, a scarce conscious joy in childhood, in
age a companion thought:—</p>
<blockquote><div><p>‘In pastures green Thou leadest me,<br>
   The quiet waters by.’</p>
</div></blockquote>
<p>The remainder of my childish recollections are all of the
matter of what was read to me, and not of any manner in the
words.  If these pleased me it was unconsciously; I listened
for news of the great vacant world upon whose edge I stood; I
listened for delightful plots that I might re-enact in play, and
romantic scenes and circumstances that I might call up before me,
with closed eyes, when I was tired of Scotland, and home, and
that weary prison of the sick-chamber in which I lay so long in
durance.  <i>Robinson Crusoe</i>; some of the books of that
cheerful, ingenious, romantic soul, Mayne Reid; and a work rather
gruesome and bloody for a child, but very picturesque, called
<i>Paul Blake</i>; these are the three strongest impressions I
remember: <i>The Swiss Family Robinson</i> came next, <i>longo
intervallo</i>.  At these I played, conjured up their
scenes, and delighted to hear them rehearsed unto seventy times
seven.  I am not sure but what <i>Paul Blake</i> came after
I could read.  It seems connected with a visit to the
country, and an experience unforgettable.  The day had been
warm; H--- and I had played together charmingly <!-- page
194--><a id="page194"></a><span class="pagenum">p.
194</span>all day in a sandy wilderness across the road; then
came the evening with a great flash of colour and a heavenly
sweetness in the air.  Somehow my play-mate had vanished, or
is out of the story, as the sages say, but I was sent into the
village on an errand; and, taking a book of fairy tales, went
down alone through a fir-wood, reading as I walked.  How
often since then has it befallen me to be happy even so; but that
was the first time: the shock of that pleasure I have never since
forgot, and if my mind serves me to the last, I never shall, for
it was then that I knew I loved reading.</p>
<h3>II</h3>
<p>To pass from hearing literature to reading it is to take a
great and dangerous step.  With not a few, I think a large
proportion of their pleasure then comes to an end; ‘the
malady of not marking’ overtakes them; they read
thenceforward by the eye alone and hear never again the chime of
fair words or the march of the stately period.  <i>Non
ragioniam</i> of these.  But to all the step is dangerous;
it involves coming of age; it is even a kind of second
weaning.  In the past all was at the choice of others; they
chose, they digested, they read aloud for us and sang to their
own tune the books of childhood.  In the future we are to
approach the silent, inexpressive type alone, like pioneers; and
the choice of what we are to read is in our own hands
thenceforward.  For instance, in the passages already
adduced, I detect and applaud the ear of my old nurse; they were
of her choice, and she imposed them on my infancy, reading the
works of others as a poet would scarce dare to read his own;
gloating on the rhythm, dwelling with delight on assonances and
alliterations.  I know very well my mother must have been
all the while trying to educate my taste upon more secular
authors; but the vigour and the continual opportunities of my
nurse triumphed, and after a long search, I can find in these
earliest volumes of my autobiography no mention of anything but
nursery rhymes, the Bible, and Mr. M’Cheyne.</p>
<p>I suppose all children agree in looking back with delight on
their school Readers.  We might not now find so much pathos
in ‘Bingen on the Rhine,’ ‘A soldier of the
Legion lay dying in Algiers,’ or in ‘The
Soldier’s Funeral,’ in the declamation of which I was
held to have surpassed myself.  ‘Robert’s
voice,’ said the master on this memorable occasion,
‘is not strong, but impressive’: an opinion which I
was fool enough to carry home to my father; who roasted me for
years in consequence.  I am sure one should not be so
deliciously tickled by the humorous pieces:—</p>
<blockquote><div><p>‘What, crusty? cries Will in a taking,<br>
Who would not be crusty with half a year’s
baking?’</p>
</div></blockquote>
<p>I think this quip would leave us cold.  The ‘Isles
of Greece’ seem rather tawdry too; but on the
‘Address to the Ocean,’ or on ‘The Dying
Gladiator,’ ‘time has writ no wrinkle.’</p>
<blockquote><div><p>’Tis the morn, but dim and dark,<br>
Whither flies the silent lark?’—</p>
</div></blockquote>
<p>does the reader recall the moment when his eye first fell upon
these lines in the Fourth Reader; and ‘surprised with joy,
impatient as the wind,’ he plunged into the sequel? 
And there was another piece, this time in prose, which none can
have forgotten; many like me must have searched Dickens with zeal
to find it again, and in its proper context, and have perhaps
been conscious of some inconsiderable measure of disappointment,
that it was only Tom Pinch who drove, in such a pomp of poetry,
to London.</p>
<p>But in the Reader we are still under guides.  What a boy
turns out for himself, as he rummages the bookshelves, is the
real test and pleasure.  My father’s library was a
spot of some austerity; the proceedings of learned societies,
some Latin divinity, cyclopædias, physical science, and,
above all, optics, held the chief place upon the shelves, and it
was only in holes and corners that anything really legible
existed as by accident.  The <i>Parent’s
Assistant</i>, <i>Rob Roy</i>, <i>Waverley</i>, and <i>Guy
Mannering</i>, the <i>Voyages of Captain Woods Rogers</i>,
Fuller’s and Bunyan’s <i>Holy Wars</i>,<i> The
Reflections of Robinson Crusoe</i>, <i>The Female Bluebeard</i>,
G. Sand’s <i>Mare au Diable</i>—(how came it in that
grave assembly!), Ainsworth’s <i>Tower of London</i>, and
four old volumes of Punch—these were the chief
exceptions.  In these latter, which made for years the chief
of my diet, I very early fell in love (almost as soon as I could
spell) with the Snob Papers.  I knew them almost by heart,
particularly the visit to the Pontos; and I remember my surprise
when I found, long afterwards, that they were famous, and signed
with a famous name; to me, as I read and admired them, they were
the works of Mr. Punch.  Time and again I tried to read
<i>Rob Roy</i>, with whom of course I was acquainted from the
<i>Tales of a Grandfather</i>; time and again the early part,
with Rashleigh and (think of it!) the adorable Diana, choked me
off; and I shall never forget the pleasure and surprise with
which, lying on the floor one summer evening, I struck of a
sudden into the first scene with Andrew Fairservice. 
‘The worthy Dr. Lightfoot’—‘mistrysted
with a bogle’—‘a wheen green
trash’—‘Jenny, lass, I think I ha’e
her’: from that day to this the phrases have been
unforgotten.  I read on, I need scarce say; I came to
Glasgow, I bided tryst on Glasgow Bridge, I met Rob Roy and the
Bailie in the Tolbooth, all with transporting pleasure; and then
the clouds gathered once more about my path; and I dozed and
skipped until I stumbled half-asleep into the clachan of
Aberfoyle, and the voices of Iverach and Galbraith recalled me to
myself.  With that scene and the defeat of Captain Thornton
the book concluded; Helen and her sons shocked even the little
schoolboy of nine or ten with their unreality; I read no more, or
I did not grasp what I was reading; and years elapsed before I
consciously met Diana and her father among the hills, or saw
Rashleigh dying in the chair.  When I think of that novel
and that evening, I am impatient with all others; they seem but
shadows and impostors; they cannot satisfy the appetite which
this awakened; and I dare be known to think it the best of Sir
Walter’s by nearly as much as Sir Walter is the best of
novelists.  Perhaps Mr. Lang is right, and our first friends
in the land of fiction are always the most real.  And yet I
had read before this <i>Guy Mannering</i>, and some of
<i>Waverley</i>, with no such delighted sense of truth and
humour, and I read immediately after the greater part of the
Waverley Novels, and was never moved again in the same way or to
the same degree.  One circumstance is suspicious: my
critical estimate of the Waverley Novels has scarce changed at
all since I was ten.  <i>Rob Roy</i>, <i>Guy Mannering</i>,
and <i>Redgauntlet</i> first; then, a little lower; <i>The
Fortunes of Nigel</i>; then, after a huge gulf, <i>Ivanhoe</i>
and <i>Anne of Geierstein</i>: the rest nowhere; such was the
verdict of the boy.  Since then <i>The Antiquary</i>, <i>St.
Ronan’s Well</i>, <i>Kenilworth</i>, and <i>The Heart of
Midlothian</i> have gone up in the scale; perhaps <i>Ivanhoe and
Anne of Geierstein</i> have gone a trifle down; Diana Vernon has
been added to my admirations in that enchanted world of <i>Rob
Roy</i>; I think more of the letters in <i>Redgauntlet</i>, and
Peter Peebles, that dreadful piece of realism, I can now read
about with equanimity, interest, and I had almost said pleasure,
while to the childish critic he often caused unmixed
distress.  But the rest is the same; I could not finish
<i>The Pirate</i> when I was a child, I have never finished it
yet; <i>Peveril of the Peak</i> dropped half way through from my
schoolboy hands, and though I have since waded to an end in a
kind of wager with myself, the exercise was quite without
enjoyment.  There is something disquieting in these
considerations.  I still think the visit to Ponto’s
the best part of the <i>Book of Snobs</i>: does that mean that I
was right when I was a child, or does it mean that I have never
grown since then, that the child is not the man’s father,
but the man? and that I came into the world with all my faculties
complete, and have only learned sinsyne to be more tolerant of
boredom? . . .</p>


<p><a id="footnote190"></a><a class="footnote pginternal" href="#citation190">[190]</a>  ‘Jehovah Tsidkenu,’
translated in the Authorised Version as ‘The Lord our
Righteousness’ (Jeremiah xxiii. 6 and xxxiii. 16).</p>
