
<h2><a id="page126"></a>VI<br>
RANDOM MEMORIES</h2>
<h3>II.—<span class="smcap">The Education of an
Engineer</span></h3>
<p><span class="smcap">Anstruther</span> is a place sacred to the
Muse; she inspired (really to a considerable extent)
Tennant’s vernacular poem <i>Anst’er Fair</i>; and I
have there waited upon her myself with much devotion. This
was when I came as a young man to glean engineering experience
from the building of the breakwater. What I gleaned, I am
sure I do not know; but indeed I had already my own private
determination to be an author; I loved the art of words and the
appearances of life; and <i>travellers</i>, and <i>headers</i>,
and <i>rubble</i>, and <i>polished ashlar</i>, and <i>pierres
perdues</i>, and even the thrilling question of the
<i>string-course</i>, interested me only (if they interested me
at all) as properties for some possible romance or as words to
add to my vocabulary. To grow a little catholic is the
compensation of years; youth is one-eyed; and in those days,
though I haunted the breakwater by day, and even loved the place
for the sake of the sunshine, the thrilling seaside air, the wash
of waves on the sea-face, the green glimmer of the divers’
helmets far below, and the musical chinking of the masons, my one
genuine preoccupation lay elsewhere, and my only industry was in
the hours when I was not on duty. I lodged with a certain
Bailie Brown, a carpenter by trade; and there, as soon as dinner
was despatched, in a chamber scented with dry rose-leaves, drew
in my chair to the table and proceeded to pour forth literature,
at such a speed, and with such intimations of early death and
immortality, as I now look back upon with wonder. Then it
was that I wrote <i>Voces Fidelium</i>, a series of dramatic
monologues in verse; then that I indited the bulk of a
covenanting novel—like so many others, never
finished. Late I sat into the night, toiling (as I thought)
under the very dart of death, toiling to leave a memory behind
me. I feel moved to thrust aside the curtain of the years,
to hail that poor feverish idiot, to bid him go to bed and clap
<i>Voces Fidelium</i> on the fire before he goes; so clear does
he appear before me, sitting there between his candles in the
rose-scented room and the late night; so ridiculous a picture (to
my elderly wisdom) does the fool present! But he was driven
to his bed at last without miraculous intervention; and the
manner of his driving sets the last touch upon this eminently
youthful business. The weather was then so warm that I must
keep the windows open; the night without was populous with
moths. As the late darkness deepened, my literary tapers
beaconed forth more brightly; thicker and thicker came the dusty
night-fliers, to gyrate for one brilliant instant round the flame
and fall in agonies upon my paper. Flesh and blood could
not endure the spectacle; to capture immortality was doubtless a
noble enterprise, but not to capture it at such a cost of
suffering; and out would go the candles, and off would I go to
bed in the darkness raging to think that the blow might fall on
the morrow, and there was <i>Voces Fidelium</i> still
incomplete. Well, the moths are—all gone, and
<i>Voces Fidelium</i> along with them; only the fool is still on
hand and practises new follies.</p>
<p>Only one thing in connection with the harbour tempted me, and
that was the diving, an experience I burned to taste of.
But this was not to be, at least in Anstruther; and the subject
involves a change of scene to the sub-arctic town of Wick.
You can never have dwelt in a country more unsightly than that
part of Caithness, the land faintly swelling, faintly falling,
not a tree, not a hedgerow, the fields divided by single slate
stones set upon their edge, the wind always singing in your ears
and (down the long road that led nowhere) thrumming in the
telegraph wires. Only as you approached the coast was there
anything to stir the heart. The plateau broke down to the
North Sea in formidable cliffs, the tall out-stacks rose like
pillars ringed about with surf, the coves were over-brimmed with
clamorous froth, the sea-birds screamed, the wind sang in the
thyme on the cliff’s edge; here and there, small ancient
castles toppled on the brim; here and there, it was possible to
dip into a dell of shelter, where you might lie and tell yourself
you were a little warm, and hear (near at hand) the whin-pods
bursting in the afternoon sun, and (farther off) the rumour of
the turbulent sea. As for Wick itself, it is one of the
meanest of man’s towns, and situate certainly on the
baldest of God’s bays. It lives for herring, and a
strange sight it is to see (of an afternoon) the heights of
Pulteney blackened by seaward-looking fishers, as when a city
crowds to a review—or, as when bees have swarmed, the
ground is horrible with lumps and clusters; and a strange sight,
and a beautiful, to see the fleet put silently out against a
rising moon, the sea-line rough as a wood with sails, and ever
and again and one after another, a boat flitting swiftly by the
silver disk. This mass of fishers, this great fleet of
boats, is out of all proportion to the town itself; and the oars
are manned and the nets hauled by immigrants from the Long Island
(as we call the outer Hebrides), who come for that season only,
and depart again, if “the take” be poor, leaving
debts behind them. In a bad year, the end of the herring
fishery is therefore an exciting time; fights are common, riots
often possible; an apple knocked from a child’s hand was
once the signal for something like a war; and even when I was
there, a gunboat lay in the bay to assist the authorities.
To contrary interests, it should be observed, the curse of Babel
is here added; the Lews men are Gaelic speakers. Caithness
has adopted English; an odd circumstance, if you reflect that
both must be largely Norsemen by descent. I remember seeing
one of the strongest instances of this division: a thing like a
Punch-and-Judy box erected on the flat grave-stones of the
churchyard; from the hutch or proscenium—I know not what to
call it—an eldritch-looking preacher laying down the law in
Gaelic about some one of the name of <i>Powl</i>, whom I at last
divined to be the apostle to the Gentiles; a large congregation
of the Lews men very devoutly listening; and on the outskirts of
the crowd, some of the town’s children (to whom the whole
affair was Greek and Hebrew) profanely playing tigg. The
same descent, the same country, the same narrow sect of the same
religion, and all these bonds made very largely nugatory by an
accidental difference of dialect!</p>
<p>Into the bay of Wick stretched the dark length of the
unfinished breakwater, in its cage of open staging; the
travellers (like frames of churches) over-plumbing all; and away
at the extreme end, the divers toiling unseen on the
foundation. On a platform of loose planks, the assistants
turned their air-mills; a stone might be swinging between wind
and water; underneath the swell ran gaily; and from time to time,
a mailed dragon with a window-glass snout came dripping up the
ladder. Youth is a blessed season after all; my stay at
Wick was in the year of <i>Voces Fidelium</i> and the rose-leaf
room at Bailie Brown’s; and already I did not care two
straws for literary glory. Posthumous ambition perhaps
requires an atmosphere of roses; and the more rugged excitant of
Wick east winds had made another boy of me. To go down in
the diving-dress, that was my absorbing fancy; and with the
countenance of a certain handsome scamp of a diver, Bob Bain by
name, I gratified the whim.</p>
<p>It was gray, harsh, easterly weather, the swell ran pretty
high, and out in the open there were “skipper’s
daughters,” when I found myself at last on the
diver’s platform, twenty pounds of lead upon each foot and
my whole person swollen with ply and ply of woollen
underclothing. One moment, the salt wind was whistling
round my night-capped head; the next, I was crushed almost double
under the weight of the helmet. As that intolerable
burthern was laid upon me, I could have found it in my heart
(only for shame’s sake) to cry off from the whole
enterprise. But it was too late. The attendants began
to turn the hurdy-gurdy, and the air to whistle through the tube;
some one screwed in the barred window of the vizor; and I was cut
off in a moment from my fellow-men; standing there in their
midst, but quite divorced from intercourse: a creature deaf and
dumb, pathetically looking forth upon them from a climate of his
own. Except that I could move and feel, I was like a man
fallen in a catalepsy. But time was scarce given me to
realise my isolation; the weights were hung upon my back and
breast, the signal rope was thrust into my unresisting hand; and
setting a twenty-pound foot upon the ladder, I began ponderously
to descend.</p>
<p>Some twenty rounds below the platform, twilight fell.
Looking up, I saw a low green heaven mottled with vanishing bells
of white; looking around, except for the weedy spokes and shafts
of the ladder, nothing but a green gloaming, somewhat opaque but
very restful and delicious. Thirty rounds lower, I stepped
off on the <i>pierres perdues</i> of the foundation; a dumb
helmeted figure took me by the hand, and made a gesture (as I
read it) of encouragement; and looking in at the creature’s
window, I beheld the face of Bain. There we were, hand to
hand and (when it pleased us) eye to eye; and either might have
burst himself with shouting, and not a whisper come to his
companion’s hearing. Each, in his own little world of
air, stood incommunicably separate.</p>
<p>Bob had told me ere this a little tale, a five minutes’
drama at the bottom of the sea, which at that moment possibly
shot across my mind. He was down with another, settling a
stone of the sea-wall. They had it well adjusted, Bob gave
the signal, the scissors were slipped, the stone set home; and it
was time to turn to something else. But still his companion
remained bowed over the block like a mourner on a tomb, or only
raised himself to make absurd contortions and mysterious signs
unknown to the vocabulary of the diver. There, then, these
two stood for awhile, like the dead and the living; till there
flashed a fortunate thought into Bob’s mind, and he
stooped, peered through the window of that other world, and
beheld the face of its inhabitant wet with streaming tears.
Ah! the man was in pain! And Bob, glancing downward, saw
what was the trouble: the block had been lowered on the foot of
that unfortunate—he was caught alive at the bottom of the
sea under fifteen tons of rock.</p>
<p>That two men should handle a stone so heavy, even swinging in
the scissors, may appear strange to the inexpert. These
must bear in mind the great density of the water of the sea, and
the surprising results of transplantation to that medium.
To understand a little what these are, and how a man’s
weight, so far from being an encumbrance, is the very ground of
his agility, was the chief lesson of my submarine
experience. The knowledge came upon me by degrees. As
I began to go forward with the hand of my estranged companion, a
world of tumbled stones was visible, pillared with the weedy
uprights of the staging: overhead, a flat roof of green: a little
in front, the sea-wall, like an unfinished rampart. And
presently in our upward progress, Bob motioned me to leap upon a
stone; I looked to see if he were possibly in earnest, and he
only signed to me the more imperiously. Now the block stood
six feet high; it would have been quite a leap to me
unencumbered; with the breast and back weights, and the twenty
pounds upon each foot, and the staggering load of the helmet, the
thing was out of reason. I laughed aloud in my tomb; and to
prove to Bob how far he was astray, I gave a little impulse from
my toes. Up I soared like a bird, my companion soaring at
my side. As high as to the stone, and then higher, I
pursued my impotent and empty flight. Even when the strong
arm of Bob had checked my shoulders, my heels continued their
ascent; so that I blew out sideways like an autumn leaf, and must
be hauled in, hand over hand, as sailors haul in the slack of a
sail, and propped upon my feet again like an intoxicated
sparrow. Yet a little higher on the foundation, and we
began to be affected by the bottom of the swell, running there
like a strong breeze of wind. Or so I must suppose; for,
safe in my cushion of air, I was conscious of no impact; only
swayed idly like a weed, and was now borne helplessly abroad, and
now swiftly—and yet with dream-like
gentleness—impelled against my guide. So does a
child’s balloon divagate upon the currents of the air, and
touch, and slide off again from every obstacle. So must
have ineffectually swung, so resented their inefficiency, those
light crowds that followed the Star of Hades, and uttered
exiguous voices in the land beyond Cocytus.</p>
<p>There was something strangely exasperating, as well as
strangely wearying, in these uncommanded evolutions. It is
bitter to return to infancy, to be supported, and directed, and
perpetually set upon your feet, by the hand of some one
else. The air besides, as it is supplied to you by the busy
millers on the platform, closes the eustachian tubes and keeps
the neophyte perpetually swallowing, till his throat is grown so
dry that he can swallow no longer. And for all these
reasons-although I had a fine, dizzy, muddle-headed joy in my
surroundings, and longed, and tried, and always failed, to lay
hands on the fish that darted here and there about me, swift as
humming-birds—yet I fancy I was rather relieved than
otherwise when Bain brought me back to the ladder and signed to
me to mount. And there was one more experience before me
even then. Of a sudden, my ascending head passed into the
trough of a swell. Out of the green, I shot at once into a
glory of rosy, almost of sanguine light—the multitudinous
seas incarnadined, the heaven above a vault of crimson. And
then the glory faded into the hard, ugly daylight of a Caithness
autumn, with a low sky, a gray sea, and a whistling wind.</p>
<p>Bob Bain had five shillings for his trouble, and I had done
what I desired. It was one of the best things I got from my
education as an engineer: of which, however, as a way of life, I
wish to speak with sympathy. It takes a man into the open
air; it keeps him hanging about harbour-sides, which is the
richest form of idling; it carries him to wild islands; it gives
him a taste of the genial dangers of the sea; it supplies him
with dexterities to exercise; it makes demands upon his
ingenuity; it will go far to cure him of any taste (if ever he
had one) for the miserable life of cities. And when it has
done so, it carries him back and shuts him in an office!
From the roaring skerry and the wet thwart of the tossing boat,
he passes to the stool and desk; and with a memory full of ships,
and seas, and perilous headlands, and the shining pharos, he must
apply his long-sighted eyes to the petty niceties of drawing, or
measure his inaccurate mind with several pages of consecutive
figures. He is a wise youth, to be sure, who can balance
one part of genuine life against two parts of drudgery between
four walls, and for the sake of the one, manfully accept the
other.</p>
<p>Wick was scarce an eligible place of stay. But how much
better it was to hang in the cold wind upon the pier, to go down
with Bob Bain among the roots of the staging, to be all day in a
boat coiling a wet rope and shouting orders—not always very
wise—than to be warm and dry, and dull, and dead-alive, in
the most comfortable office. And Wick itself had in those
days a note of originality. It may have still, but I
misdoubt it much. The old minister of Keiss would not
preach, in these degenerate times, for an hour and a half upon
the clock. The gipsies must be gone from their cavern;
where you might see, from the mouth, the women tending their
fire, like Meg Merrilies, and the men sleeping off their coarse
potations; and where, in winter gales, the surf would beleaguer
them closely, bursting in their very door. A traveller
to-day upon the Thurso coach would scarce observe a little cloud
of smoke among the moorlands, and be told, quite openly, it
marked a private still. He would not indeed make that
journey, for there is now no Thurso coach. And even if he
could, one little thing that happened to me could never happen to
him, or not with the same trenchancy of contrast.</p>
<p>We had been upon the road all evening; the coach-top was
crowded with Lews fishers going home, scarce anything but Gaelic
had sounded in my ears; and our way had lain throughout over a
moorish country very northern to behold. Latish at night,
though it was still broad day in our subarctic latitude, we came
down upon the shores of the roaring Pentland Firth, that grave of
mariners; on one hand, the cliffs of Dunnet Head ran seaward; in
front was the little bare, white town of Castleton, its streets
full of blowing sand; nothing beyond, but the North Islands, the
great deep, and the perennial ice-fields of the Pole. And
here, in the last imaginable place, there sprang up young
outlandish voices and a chatter of some foreign speech; and I
saw, pursuing the coach with its load of Hebridean
fishers—as they had pursued <i>vetturini</i> up the passes
of the Apennines or perhaps along the grotto under Virgil’s
tomb—two little dark-eyed, white-toothed Italian vagabonds,
of twelve to fourteen years of age, one with a hurdy-gurdy, the
other with a cage of white mice. The coach passed on, and
their small Italian chatter died in the distance; and I was left
to marvel how they had wandered into that country, and how they
fared in it, and what they thought of it, and when (if ever) they
should see again the silver wind-breaks run among the olives, and
the stone-pine stand guard upon Etruscan sepulchres.</p>
<p>Upon any American, the strangeness of this incident is
somewhat lost. For as far back as he goes in his own land,
he will find some alien camping there; the Cornish miner, the
French or Mexican half-blood, the negro in the South, these are
deep in the woods and far among the mountains. But in an
old, cold, and rugged country such as mine, the days of
immigration are long at an end; and away up there, which was at
that time far beyond the northernmost extreme of railways, hard
upon the shore of that ill-omened strait of whirlpools, in a land
of moors where no stranger came, unless it should be a sportsman
to shoot grouse or an antiquary to decipher runes, the presence
of these small pedestrians struck the mind as though a
bird-of-paradise had risen from the heather or an albatross come
fishing in the bay of Wick. They were as strange to their
surroundings as my lordly evangelist or the old Spanish grandee
on the Fair Isle.</p>
</div><!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
