
<h2><a id="page138"></a>VII<br>
THE LANTERN-BEARERS</h2>
<h3>I</h3>
<p><span class="smcap">These</span> boys congregated every autumn
about a certain easterly fisher-village, where they tasted in a
high degree the glory of existence. The place was created
seemingly on purpose for the diversion of young gentlemen.
A street or two of houses, mostly red and many of, them tiled; a
number of fine trees clustered about the manse and the kirkyard,
and turning the chief street into a shady alley; many little
gardens more than usually bright with flowers; nets a-drying, and
fisher-wives scolding in the backward parts; a smell of fish, a
genial smell of seaweed; whiffs of blowing sand at the
street-corners; shops with golf-balls and bottled lollipops;
another shop with penny pickwicks (that remarkable cigar) and the
<i>London Journal</i>, dear to me for its startling pictures, and
a few novels, dear for their suggestive names: such, as well as
memory serves me, were the ingredients of the town. These,
you are to conceive posted on a spit between two sandy bays, and
sparsely flanked with villas enough for the boys to lodge in with
their subsidiary parents, not enough (not yet enough) to cocknify
the scene: a haven in the rocks in front: in front of that, a
file of gray islets: to the left, endless links and sand wreaths,
a wilderness of hiding-holes, alive with popping rabbits and
soaring gulls: to the right, a range of seaward crags, one rugged
brow beyond another; the ruins of a mighty and ancient fortress
on the brink of one; coves between—now charmed into
sunshine quiet, now whistling with wind and clamorous with
bursting surges; the dens and sheltered hollows redolent of thyme
and southernwood, the air at the cliff’s edge brisk and
clean and pungent of the sea—in front of all, the Bass
Rock, tilted seaward like a doubtful bather, the surf ringing it
with white, the solan-geese hanging round its summit like a great
and glittering smoke. This choice piece of seaboard was
sacred, besides, to the wrecker; and the Bass, in the eye of
fancy, still flew the colours of King James; and in the ear of
fancy the arches of Tantallon still rang with horse-shoe iron,
and echoed to the commands of Bell-the-Cat.</p>
<p>There was nothing to mar your days, if you were a boy
summering in that part, but the embarrassment of pleasure.
You might golf if you wanted; but I seem to have been better
employed. You might secrete yourself in the Lady’s
Walk, a certain sunless dingle of elders, all mossed over by the
damp as green as grass, and dotted here and there by the
stream-side with roofless walls, the cold homes of
anchorites. To fit themselves for life, and with a special
eye to acquire the art of smoking, it was even common for the
boys to harbour there; and you might have seen a single penny
pickwick, honestly shared in lengths with a blunt knife, bestrew
the glen with these apprentices. Again, you might join our
fishing parties, where we sat perched as thick as solan-geese, a
covey of little anglers, boy and girl, angling over each
other’s heads, to the to the much entanglement of lines and
loss of podleys and consequent shrill recrimination—shrill
as the geese themselves. Indeed, had that been all, you
might have done this often; but though fishing be a fine pastime,
the podley is scarce to be regarded as a dainty for the table;
and it was a point of honour that a boy should eat all that he
had taken. Or again, you might climb the Law, where the
whale’s jawbone stood landmark in the buzzing wind, and
behold the face of many counties, and the smoke and spires of
many towns, and the sails of distant ships. You might
bathe, now in the flaws of fine weather, that we pathetically
call our summer, now in a gale of wind, with the sand scourging
your bare hide, your clothes thrashing abroad from underneath
their guardian stone, the froth of the great breakers casting you
headlong ere it had drowned your knees. Or you might
explore the tidal rocks, above all in the ebb of springs, when
the very roots of the hills were for the nonce discovered;
following my leader from one group to another, groping in
slippery tangle for the wreck of ships, wading in pools after the
abominable creatures of the sea, and ever with an eye cast
backward on the march off the tide and the menaced line of your
retreat. And then you might go Crusoeing, a word that
covers all extempore eating in the open air: digging perhaps a
house under the margin of the links, kindling a fire of the
sea-ware, and cooking apples there—if they were truly
apples, for I sometimes suppose the merchant must have played us
off with some inferior and quite local fruit capable of
resolving, in the neighbourhood of fire, into mere sand and smoke
and iodine; or perhaps pushing to Tantallon, you might lunch on
sandwiches and visions in the grassy court, while the wind hummed
in the crumbling turrets; or clambering along the coast, eat
geans <a id="citation141"></a><a class="citation pginternal" href="#footnote141">[141]</a> (the worst, I must suppose, in
Christendom) from an adventurous gean tree that had taken root
under a cliff, where it was shaken with an ague of east wind, and
silvered after gales with salt, and grew so foreign among its
bleak surroundings that to eat of its produce was an adventure in
itself.</p>
<p>There are mingled some dismal memories with so many that were
joyous. Of the fisher-wife, for instance, who had cut her
throat at Canty Bay; and of how I ran with the other children to
the top of the Quadrant, and beheld a posse of silent people
escorting a cart, and on the cart, bound in a chair, her throat
bandaged, and the bandage all bloody—horror!—the
fisher-wife herself, who continued thenceforth to hag-ride my
thoughts, and even to-day (as I recall the scene) darkens
daylight. She was lodged in the little old jail in the
chief street; but whether or no she died there, with a wise
terror of the worst, I never inquired. She had been
tippling; it was but a dingy tragedy; and it seems strange and
hard that, after all these years, the poor crazy sinner should be
still pilloried on her cart in the scrap-book of my memory.
Nor shall I readily forget a certain house in the Quadrant where
a visitor died, and a dark old woman continued to dwell alone
with the dead body; nor how this old woman conceived a hatred to
myself and one of my cousins, and in the dread hour of the dusk,
as we were clambering on the garden-walls, opened a window in
that house of mortality and cursed us in a shrill voice and with
a marrowy choice of language. It was a pair of very
colourless urchins that fled down the lane from this remarkable
experience! But I recall with a more doubtful sentiment,
compounded out of fear and exultation, the coil of equinoctial
tempests; trumpeting squalls, scouring flaws of rain; the boats
with their reefed lugsails scudding for the harbour mouth, where
danger lay, for it was hard to make when the wind had any east in
it; the wives clustered with blowing shawls at the pier-head,
where (if fate was against them) they might see boat and husband
and sons—their whole wealth and their whole
family—engulfed under their eyes; and (what I saw but once)
a troop of neighbours forcing such an unfortunate homeward, and
she squalling and battling in their midst, a figure scarcely
human, a tragic Mænad.</p>
<p>These are things that I recall with interest; but what my
memory dwells upon the most, I have been all this while
withholding. It was a sport peculiar to the place, and
indeed to a week or so of our two months’ holiday
there. Maybe it still flourishes in its native spot; for
boys and their pastimes are swayed by periodic forces inscrutable
to man; so that tops and marbles reappear in their due season,
regular like the sun and moon; and the harmless art of
knucklebones has seen the fall of the Roman empire and the rise
of the United States. It may still flourish in its native
spot, but nowhere else, I am persuaded; for I tried myself to
introduce it on Tweedside, and was defeated lamentably; its charm
being quite local, like a country wine that cannot be
exported.</p>
<p>The idle manner of it was this:—</p>
<p>Toward the end of September, when school-time was drawing near
and the nights were already black, we would begin to sally from
our-respective villas, each equipped with a tin bull’s-eye
lantern. The thing was so well known that it had worn a rut
in the commerce of Great Britain; and the grocers, about the due
time, began to garnish their windows with our particular brand of
luminary. We wore them buckled to the waist upon a cricket
belt, and over them, such was the rigour of the game, a buttoned
top-coat. They smelled noisomely of blistered tin; they
never burned aright, though they would always burn our fingers;
their use was naught; the pleasure of them merely fanciful; and
yet a boy with a bull’s-eye under his top-coat asked for
nothing more. The fishermen used lanterns about their
boats, and it was from them, I suppose, that we had got the hint;
but theirs were not bull’s-eyes, nor did we ever play at
being fishermen. The police carried them at their belts,
and we had plainly copied them in that; yet we did not pretend to
be policemen. Burglars, indeed, we may have had some
haunting thoughts of; and we had certainly an eye to past ages
when lanterns were more common, and to certain story-books in
which we had found them to figure very largely. But take it
for all in all, the pleasure of the thing was substantive; and to
be a boy with a bull’s-eye under his top-coat was good
enough for us.</p>
<p>When two of these asses met, there would be an anxious
“Have you got your lantern?” and a gratified
“Yes!” That was the shibboleth, and very needful too;
for, as it was the rule to keep our glory contained, none could
recognise a lantern-bearer, unless (like the polecat) by the
smell. Four or five would sometimes climb into the belly of
a ten-man lugger, with nothing but the thwarts above
them—for the cabin was usually locked, or choose out some
hollow of the links where the wind might whistle overhead.
There the coats would be unbuttoned and the bull’s-eyes
discovered; and in the chequering glimmer, under the huge windy
hall of the night, and cheered by a rich steam of toasting
tinware, these fortunate young gentlemen would crouch together in
the cold sand of the links or on the scaly bilges of the
fishing-boat, and delight themselves with inappropriate
talk. Woe is me that I may not give some
specimens—some of their foresights of life, or deep
inquiries into the rudiments of man and nature, these were so
fiery and so innocent, they were so richly silly, so romantically
young. But the talk, at any rate, was but a condiment; and
these gatherings themselves only accidents in the career of the
lantern-bearer. The essence of this bliss was to walk by
yourself in the black night; the slide shut, the top-coat
buttoned; not a ray escaping, whether to conduct your footsteps
or to make your glory public: a mere pillar of darkness in the
dark; and all the while, deep down in the privacy of your
fool’s heart, to know you had a bull’s-eye at your
belt, and to exult and sing over the knowledge.</p>
<h3>II</h3>
<p>It is said that a poet has died young in the breast of the
most stolid. It may be contended, rather, that this
(somewhat minor) bard in almost every case survives, and is the
spice of life to his possessor. Justice is not done to the
versatility and the unplumbed childishness of man’s
imagination. His life from without may seem but a rude
mound of mud; there will be some golden chamber at the heart of
it, in which he dwells delighted; and for as dark as his pathway
seems to the observer, he will have some kind of a
bull’s-eye at his belt.</p>
<p>It would be hard to pick out a career more cheerless than that
of Dancer, the miser, as he figures in the “Old Bailey
Reports,” a prey to the most sordid persecutions, the butt
of his neighbourhood, betrayed by his hired man, his house
beleaguered by the impish schoolboy, and he himself grinding and
fuming and impotently fleeing to the law against these
pin-pricks. You marvel at first that any one should
willingly prolong a life so destitute of charm and dignity; and
then you call to memory that had he chosen, had he ceased to be a
miser, he could have been freed at once from these trials, and
might have built himself a castle and gone escorted by a
squadron. For the love of more recondite joys, which we
cannot estimate, which, it may be, we should envy, the man had
willingly forgone both comfort and consideration.
“His mind to him a kingdom was”; and sure enough,
digging into that mind, which seems at first a dust-heap, we
unearth some priceless jewels. For Dancer must have had the
love of power and the disdain of using it, a noble character in
itself; disdain of many pleasures, a chief part of what is
commonly called wisdom; disdain of the inevitable end, that
finest trait of mankind; scorn of men’s opinions, another
element of virtue; and at the back of all, a conscience just like
yours and mine, whining like a cur, swindling like a
thimble-rigger, but still pointing (there or there-about) to some
conventional standard. Here were a cabinet portrait to
which Hawthorne perhaps had done justice; and yet not Hawthorne
either, for he was mildly minded, and it lay not in him to create
for us that throb of the miser’s pulse, his fretful energy
of gusto, his vast arms of ambition clutching in he knows not
what: insatiable, insane, a god with a muck-rake. Thus, at
least, looking in the bosom of the miser, consideration detects
the poet in the full tide of life, with more, indeed, of the
poetic fire than usually goes to epics; and tracing that mean man
about his cold hearth, and to and fro in his discomfortable
house, spies within him a blazing bonfire of delight. And
so with others, who do not live by bread alone, but by some
cherished and perhaps fantastic pleasure; who are meat salesmen
to the external eye, and possibly to themselves are Shakespeares,
Napoleons, or Beethovens; who have not one virtue to rub against
another in the field of active life, and yet perhaps, in the life
of contemplation, sit with the saints. We see them on the
street, and we can count their buttons; but heaven knows in what
they pride themselves! heaven knows where they have set their
treasure!</p>
<p>There is one fable that touches very near the quick of life:
the fable of the monk who passed into the woods, heard a bird
break into song, hearkened for a trill or two, and found himself
on his return a stranger at his convent gates; for he had been
absent fifty years, and of all his comrades there survived but
one to recognise him. It is not only in the woods that this
enchanter carols, though perhaps he is native there. He
sings in the most doleful places. The miser hears him and
chuckles, and the days are moments. With no more apparatus
than an ill-smelling lantern I have evoked him on the naked
links. All life that is not merely mechanical is spun out
of two strands: seeking for that bird and hearing him. And
it is just this that makes life so hard to value, and the delight
of each so incommunicable. And just a knowledge of this,
and a remembrance of those fortunate hours in which the bird has
sung to us, that fills us with such wonder when we turn the pages
of the realist. There, to be sure, we find a picture of
life in so far as it consists of mud and of old iron, cheap
desires and cheap fears, that which we are ashamed to remember
and that which we are careless whether we forget; but of the note
of that time-devouring nightingale we hear no news.</p>
<p>The case of these writers of romance is most obscure.
They have been boys and youths; they have lingered outside the
window of the beloved, who was then most probably writing to some
one else; they have sat before a sheet of paper, and felt
themselves mere continents of congested poetry, not one line of
which would flow; they have walked alone in the woods, they have
walked in cities under the countless lamps; they have been to
sea, they have hated, they have feared, they have longed to knife
a man, and maybe done it; the wild taste of life has stung their
palate. Or, if you deny them all the rest, one pleasure at
least they have tasted to the full—their books are there to
prove it—the keen pleasure of successful literary
composition. And yet they fill the globe with volumes,
whose cleverness inspires me with despairing admiration, and
whose consistent falsity to all I care to call existence, with
despairing wrath. If I had no better hope than to continue
to revolve among the dreary and petty businesses, and to be moved
by the paltry hopes and fears with which they surround and
animate their heroes, I declare I would die now. But there
has never an hour of mine gone quite so dully yet; if it were
spent waiting at a railway junction, I would have some scattering
thoughts, I could count some grains of memory, compared to which
the whole of one of these romances seems but dross.</p>
<p>These writers would retort (if I take them properly) that this
was very true; that it was the same with themselves and other
persons of (what they call) the artistic temperament; that in
this we were exceptional, and should apparently be ashamed of
ourselves; but that our works must deal exclusively with (what
they call) the average man, who was a prodigious dull fellow, and
quite dead to all but the paltriest considerations. I
accept the issue. We can only know others by
ourselves. The artistic temperament (a plague on the
expression!) does not make us different from our fellowmen, or it
would make us incapable of writing novels; and the average man (a
murrain on the word!) is just like you and me, or he would not be
average. It was Whitman who stamped a kind of Birmingham
sacredness upon the latter phrase; but Whitman knew very well,
and showed very nobly, that the average man was full of joys and
full of a poetry of his own. And this harping on
life’s dulness and man’s meanness is a loud
profession of incompetence; it is one of two things: the cry of
the blind eye, <i>I cannot see</i>, or the complaint of the dumb
tongue, <i>I cannot utter</i>. To draw a life without
delights is to prove I have not realised it. To picture a
man without some sort of poetry—well, it goes near to prove
my case, for it shows an author may have little enough. To
see Dancer only as a dirty, old, small-minded, impotently fuming
man, in a dirty house, besieged by Harrow boys, and probably
beset by small attorneys, is to show myself as keen an observer
as . . . the Harrow boys. But these young gentlemen (with a
more becoming modesty) were content to pluck Dancer by the
coat-tails; they did not suppose they had surprised his secret or
could put him living in a book: and it is there my error would
have lain. Or say that in the same romance—I continue
to call these books romances, in the hope of giving
pain—say that in the same romance, which now begins really
to take shape, I should leave to speak of Dancer, and follow
instead the Harrow boys; and say that I came on some such
business as that of my lantern-bearers on the links; and
described the boys as very cold, spat upon by flurries of rain,
and drearily surrounded, all of which they were; and their talk
as silly and indecent, which it certainly was. I might upon
these lines, and had I Zola’s genius, turn out, in a page
or so, a gem of literary art, render the lantern-light with the
touches of a master, and lay on the indecency with the ungrudging
hand of love; and when all was done, what a triumph would my
picture be of shallowness and dulness! how it would have missed
the point! how it would have belied the boys! To the ear of
the stenographer, the talk is merely silly and indecent; but ask
the boys themselves, and they are discussing (as it is highly
proper they should) the possibilities of existence. To the
eye of the observer they are wet and cold and drearily
surrounded; but ask themselves, and they are in the heaven of a
recondite pleasure, the ground of which is an ill-smelling
lantern.</p>
<h3>III</h3>
<p>For, to repeat, the ground of a man’s joy is often hard
to hit. It may hinge at times upon a mere accessory, like
the lantern; it may reside, like Dancer’s, in the
mysterious inwards of psychology. It may consist with
perpetual failure, and find exercise in the continued
chase. It has so little bond with externals (such as the
observer scribbles in his note-book) that it may even touch them
not; and the man’s true life, for which he consents to
live, lie altogether in the field of fancy. The clergyman,
in his spare hours, may be winning battles, the farmer sailing
ships, the banker reaping triumph in the arts: all leading
another life, plying another trade from that they chose; like the
poet’s housebuilder, who, after all, is cased in stone,</p>
<blockquote><div><p>“By his fireside, as impotent fancy
prompts.<br>
Rebuilds it to his liking.”</p>
</div></blockquote>
<p>In such a case the poetry runs underground. The observer
(poor soul, with his documents!) is all abroad. For to look
at the man is but to court deception. We shall see the
trunk from which he draws his nourishment; but he himself is
above and abroad in the green dome of foliage, hummed through by
winds and nested in by nightingales. And the true realism
were that of the poets, to climb up after him like a squirrel,
and catch some glimpse of the heaven for which he lives.</p>
<p>And, the true realism, always and everywhere, is that of the
poets: to find out where joy resides, and give it a voice far
beyond singing.</p>
<p>For to miss the joy is to miss all. In the joy of the
actors lies the sense of any action. That is the
explanation, that the excuse. To one who has not the secret
of the lanterns, the scene upon the links is meaningless.
And hence the haunting and truly spectral unreality of realistic
books. Hence, when we read the English realists, the
incredulous wonder with which we observe the hero’s
constancy under the submerging tide of dulness, and how he bears
up with his jibbing sweetheart, and endures the chatter of idiot
girls, and stands by his whole unfeatured wilderness of an
existence, instead of seeking relief in drink or foreign
travel. Hence in the French, in that meat-market of
middle-aged sensuality, the disgusted surprise with which we see
the hero drift sidelong, and practically quite untempted, into
every description of misconduct and dishonour. In each, we
miss the personal poetry, the enchanted atmosphere, that rainbow
work of fancy that clothes what is naked and seems to ennoble
what is base; in each, life falls dead like dough, instead of
soaring away like a balloon into the colours of the sunset; each
is true, each inconceivable; for no man lives in the external
truth, among salts and acids, but in the warm, phantasmagoric
chamber of his brain, with the painted windows and the storied
walls.</p>
<p>Of this falsity we have had a recent example from a man who
knows far better—Tolstoi’s <i>Powers of
Darkness</i>. Here is a piece full of force and truth, yet
quite untrue. For before Mikita was led into so dire a
situation he was tempted, and temptations are beautiful at least
in part; and a work which dwells on the ugliness of crime and
gives no hint of any loveliness in the temptation, sins against
the modesty of life, and even when a Tolstoi writes it, sinks to
melodrama. The peasants are not understood; they saw their
life in fairer colours; even the deaf girl was clothed in poetry
for Mikita, or he had never fallen. And so, once again,
even an Old Bailey melodrama, without some brightness of poetry
and lustre of existence, falls into the inconceivable and ranks
with fairy tales.</p>
<h3>IV</h3>
<p>In nobler books we are moved with something like the emotions
of life; and this emotion is very variously provoked. We
are so moved when Levine labours in the field, when André
sinks beyond emotion, when Richard Feverel and Lucy Desborough
meet beside the river, when Antony, “not cowardly, puts off
his helmet,” when Kent has infinite pity on the dying Lear,
when, in Dostoieffky’s <i>Despised and Rejected</i>, the
uncomplaining hero drains his cup of suffering and virtue.
These are notes that please the great heart of man. Not
only love, and the fields, and the bright face of danger, but
sacrifice and death and unmerited suffering humbly supported,
touch in us the vein of the poetic. We love to think of
them, we long to try them, we are humbly hopeful that we may
prove heroes also.</p>
<p>We have heard, perhaps, too much of lesser matters. Here
is the door, here is the open air. <i>Itur in antiquam
silvam</i>.</p>
</div><!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">

<p><a id="footnote141"></a><a class="footnote pginternal" href="#citation141">[141]</a> Wild cherries.</p>
