
<h2><!-- page 222--><a id="page222"></a><span class="pagenum">p. 222</span>XII.<br>
THE STIMULATION OF THE ALPS</h2>
<p>To any one who should come from a southern sanitarium to the
Alps, the row of sun-burned faces round the table would present
the first surprise.  He would begin by looking for the
invalids, and he would lose his pains, for not one out of five of
even the bad cases bears the mark of sickness on his face. 
The plump sunshine from above and its strong reverberation from
below colour the skin like an Indian climate; the treatment,
which consists mainly of the open air, exposes even the sickliest
to tan, and a tableful of invalids comes, in a month or two, to
resemble a tableful of hunters.  But although he may be thus
surprised at the first glance, his astonishment will grow
greater, as he experiences the effects of the climate on
himself.  In many ways it is a trying business to reside
upon the Alps: the stomach is exercised, the appetite often
languishes; the liver may at times rebel; and because you have
come so far from metropolitan advantages, it does not follow that
you shall recover.  But one thing is undeniable—that
in the rare air, clear, cold, and blinding light of Alpine
winters, a man takes a certain troubled delight in his existence
which can nowhere else be paralleled.  He is perhaps no
happier, but he is stingingly alive.  It does not, perhaps,
come out of him in work or exercise, yet he feels an enthusiasm
of the blood unknown in more temperate climates.  It may not
be health, but it is fun.</p>
<p>There is nothing more difficult to communicate on paper than
this baseless ardour, this stimulation of the brain, this sterile
joyousness of spirits.  You wake every morning, see the gold
upon the snow-peaks, become filled with courage, and bless God
for your prolonged existence.  The valleys are but a stride
to you; you cast your shoe over the hilltops; your ears and your
heart sing; in the words of an unverified quotation from the
Scotch psalms, you feel yourself fit ‘on the wings of all
the winds’ to ‘come flying all abroad.’ 
Europe and your mind are too narrow for that flood of
energy.  Yet it is notable that you are hard to root out of
your bed; that you start forth, singing, indeed, on your walk,
yet are unusually ready to turn home again; that the best of you
is volatile; and that although the restlessness remains till
night, the strength is early at an end.  With all these
heady jollities, you are half conscious of an underlying languor
in the body; you prove not to be so well as you had fancied; you
weary before you have well begun; and though you mount at morning
with the lark, that is not precisely a song-bird’s heart
that you bring back with you when you return with aching limbs
and peevish temper to your inn.</p>
<p>It is hard to say wherein it lies, but this joy of Alpine
winters is its own reward.  Baseless, in a sense, it is more
than worth more permanent improvements.  The dream of health
is perfect while it lasts; and if, in trying to realise it, you
speedily wear out the dear hallucination, still every day, and
many times a day, you are conscious of a strength you scarce
possess, and a delight in living as merry as it proves to be
transient.</p>
<p>The brightness—heaven and earth conspiring to be
bright—the levity and quiet of the air; the odd stirring
silence—more stirring than a tumult; the snow, the frost,
the enchanted landscape: all have their part in the effect and on
the memory, ‘<i>tous vous tapent sur la
téte</i>’; and yet when you have enumerated all, you
have gone no nearer to explain or even to qualify the delicate
exhilaration that you feel—delicate, you may say, and yet
excessive, greater than can be said in prose, almost greater than
an invalid can bear.  There is a certain wine of France
known in England in some gaseous disguise, but when drunk in the
land of its nativity still as a pool, clean as river water, and
as heady as verse.  It is more than probable that in its
noble natural condition this was the very wine of Anjou so
beloved by Athos in the ‘Musketeers.’  Now, if
the reader has ever washed down a liberal second breakfast with
the wine in question, and gone forth, on the back of these
dilutions, into a sultry, sparkling noontide, he will have felt
an influence almost as genial, although strangely grosser, than
this fairy titillation of the nerves among the snow and sunshine
of the Alps.  That also is a mode, we need not say of
intoxication, but of insobriety.  Thus also a man walks in a
strong sunshine of the mind, and follows smiling, insubstantial
meditations.  And whether he be really so clever or so
strong as he supposes, in either case he will enjoy his chimera
while it lasts.</p>
<p>The influence of this giddy air displays itself in many
secondary ways.  A certain sort of laboured pleasantry has
already been recognised, and may perhaps have been remarked in
these papers, as a sort peculiar to that climate.  People
utter their judgments with a cannonade of syllables; a big word
is as good as a meal to them; and the turn of a phrase goes
further than humour or wisdom.  By the professional writer
many sad vicissitudes have to be undergone.  At first he
cannot write at all.  The heart, it appears, is unequal to
the pressure of business, and the brain, left without
nourishment, goes into a mild decline.  Next, some power of
work returns to him, accompanied by jumping headaches. 
Last, the spring is opened, and there pours at once from his pen
a world of blatant, hustling polysyllables, and talk so high as,
in the old joke, to be positively offensive in hot weather. 
He writes it in good faith and with a sense of inspiration; it is
only when he comes to read what he has written that surprise and
disquiet seize upon his mind.  What is he to do, poor
man?  All his little fishes talk like whales.  This
yeasty inflation, this stiff and strutting architecture of the
sentence has come upon him while he slept; and it is not he, it
is the Alps, who are to blame.  He is not, perhaps, alone,
which somewhat comforts him.  Nor is the ill without a
remedy.  Some day, when the spring returns, he shall go down
a little lower in this world, and remember quieter inflections
and more modest language.  But here, in the meantime, there
seems to swim up some outline of a new cerebral hygiene and a
good time coming, when experienced advisers shall send a man to
the proper measured level for the ode, the biography, or the
religious tract; and a nook may be found between the sea and
Chimborazo, where Mr. Swinburne shall be able to write more
continently, and Mr. Browning somewhat slower.</p>
<p>Is it a return of youth, or is it a congestion of the
brain?  It is a sort of congestion, perhaps, that leads the
invalid, when all goes well, to face the new day with such a
bubbling cheerfulness.  It is certainly congestion that
makes night hideous with visions, all the chambers of a
many-storeyed caravanserai, haunted with vociferous nightmares,
and many wakeful people come down late for breakfast in the
morning.  Upon that theory the cynic may explain the whole
affair—exhilaration, nightmares, pomp of tongue and
all.  But, on the other hand, the peculiar blessedness of
boyhood may itself be but a symptom of the same complaint, for
the two effects are strangely similar; and the frame of mind of
the invalid upon the Alps is a sort of intermittent youth, with
periods of lassitude.  The fountain of Juventus does not
play steadily in these parts; but there it plays, and possibly
nowhere else.</p>
