
<h2><!-- page 199--><a id="page199"></a><span class="pagenum">p. 199</span>VIII.<br>
THE IDEAL HOUSE</h2>
<p>Two things are necessary in any neighbourhood where we propose
to spend a life: a desert and some living water.</p>
<p>There are many parts of the earth’s face which offer the
necessary combination of a certain wildness with a kindly
variety.  A great prospect is desirable, but the want may be
otherwise supplied; even greatness can be found on the small
scale; for the mind and the eye measure differently.  Bold
rocks near hand are more inspiriting than distant Alps, and the
thick fern upon a Surrey heath makes a fine forest for the
imagination, and the dotted yew trees noble mountains.  A
Scottish moor with birches and firs grouped here and there upon a
knoll, or one of those rocky seaside deserts of Provence
overgrown with rosemary and thyme and smoking with aroma, are
places where the mind is never weary.  Forests, being more
enclosed, are not at first sight so attractive, but they exercise
a spell; they must, however, be diversified with either heath or
rock, and are hardly to be considered perfect without
conifers.  Even sand-hills, with their intricate plan, and
their gulls and rabbits, will stand well for the necessary
desert.</p>
<p>The house must be within hail of either a little river or the
sea.  A great river is more fit for poetry than to adorn a
neighbourhood; its sweep of waters increases the scale of the
scenery and the distance of one notable object from another; and
a lively burn gives us, in the space of a few yards, a greater
variety of promontory and islet, of cascade, shallow goil, and
boiling pool, with answerable changes both of song and colour,
than a navigable stream in many hundred miles.  The fish,
too, make a more considerable feature of the brookside, and the
trout plumping in the shadow takes the ear.  A stream
should, besides, be narrow enough to cross, or the burn hard by a
bridge, or we are at once shut out of Eden.  The quantity of
water need be of no concern, for the mind sets the scale, and can
enjoy a Niagara Fall of thirty inches.  Let us approve the
singer of</p>
<blockquote><div><p>‘Shallow rivers, by whose falls<br>
Melodious birds sing madrigals.’</p>
</div></blockquote>
<p>If the sea is to be our ornamental water, choose an open
seaboard with a heavy beat of surf; one much broken in outline,
with small havens and dwarf headlands; if possible a few islets;
and as a first necessity, rocks reaching out into deep
water.  Such a rock on a calm day is a better station than
the top of Teneriffe or Chimborazo.  In short, both for the
desert and the water, the conjunction of many near and bold
details is bold scenery for the imagination and keeps the mind
alive.</p>
<p>Given these two prime luxuries, the nature of the country
where we are to live is, I had almost said, indifferent; after
that inside the garden, we can construct a country of our
own.  Several old trees, a considerable variety of level,
several well-grown hedges to divide our garden into provinces, a
good extent of old well-set turf, and thickets of shrubs and
ever-greens to be cut into and cleared at the new owner’s
pleasure, are the qualities to be sought for in your chosen
land.  Nothing is more delightful than a succession of small
lawns, opening one out of the other through tall hedges; these
have all the charm of the old bowling-green repeated, do not
require the labour of many trimmers, and afford a series of
changes.  You must have much lawn against the early summer,
so as to have a great field of daisies, the year’s morning
frost; as you must have a wood of lilacs, to enjoy to the full
the period of their blossoming.  Hawthorn is another of the
Spring’s ingredients; but it is even best to have a rough
public lane at one side of your enclosure which, at the right
season, shall become an avenue of bloom and odour.  The old
flowers are the best and should grow carelessly in corners. 
Indeed, the ideal fortune is to find an old garden, once very
richly cared for, since sunk into neglect, and to tend, not
repair, that neglect; it will thus have a smack of nature and
wildness which skilful dispositions cannot overtake.  The
gardener should be an idler, and have a gross partiality to the
kitchen plots: an eager or toilful gardener misbecomes the garden
landscape; a tasteful gardener will be ever meddling, will keep
the borders raw, and take the bloom off nature.  Close
adjoining, if you are in the south, an olive-yard, if in the
north, a swarded apple-orchard reaching to the stream, completes
your miniature domain; but this is perhaps best entered through a
door in the high fruit-wall; so that you close the door behind
you on your sunny plots, your hedges and evergreen jungle, when
you go down to watch the apples falling in the pool.  It is
a golden maxim to cultivate the garden for the nose, and the eyes
will take care of themselves.  Nor must the ear be
forgotten: without birds a garden is a prison-yard.  There
is a garden near Marseilles on a steep hill-side, walking by
which, upon a sunny morning, your ear will suddenly be ravished
with a burst of small and very cheerful singing: some score of
cages being set out there to sun their occupants.  This is a
heavenly surprise to any passer-by; but the price paid, to keep
so many ardent and winged creatures from their liberty, will make
the luxury too dear for any thoughtful pleasure-lover. 
There is only one sort of bird that I can tolerate caged, though
even then I think it hard, and that is what is called in France
the Bec-d’Argent.  I once had two of these pigmies in
captivity; and in the quiet, hire house upon a silent street
where I was then living, their song, which was not much louder
than a bee’s, but airily musical, kept me in a perpetual
good humour.  I put the cage upon my table when I worked,
carried it with me when I went for meals, and kept it by my head
at night: the first thing in the morning, these <i>maestrini</i>
would pipe up.  But these, even if you can pardon their
imprisonment, are for the house.  In the garden the wild
birds must plant a colony, a chorus of the lesser warblers that
should be almost deafening, a blackbird in the lilacs, a
nightingale down the lane, so that you must stroll to hear it,
and yet a little farther, tree-tops populous with rooks.</p>
<p>Your house should not command much outlook; it should be set
deep and green, though upon rising ground, or, if possible,
crowning a knoll, for the sake of drainage.  Yet it must be
open to the east, or you will miss the sunrise; sunset occurring
so much later, you can go up a few steps and look the other
way.  A house of more than two stories is a mere barrack;
indeed the ideal is of one story, raised upon cellars.  If
the rooms are large, the house may be small: a single room,
lofty, spacious, and lightsome, is more palatial than a castleful
of cabinets and cupboards.  Yet size in a house, and some
extent and intricacy of corridor, is certainly delightful to the
flesh.  The reception room should be, if possible, a place
of many recesses, which are ‘petty retiring places for
conference’; but it must have one long wall with a divan:
for a day spent upon a divan, among a world of cushions, is as
full of diversion as to travel.  The eating-room, in the
French mode, should be <i>ad hoc</i>: unfurnished, but with a
buffet, the table, necessary chairs, one or two of
Canaletto’s etchings, and a tile fire-place for the
winter.  In neither of these public places should there be
anything beyond a shelf or two of books; but the passages may be
one library from end to end, and the stair, if there be one,
lined with volumes in old leather, very brightly carpeted, and
leading half-way up, and by way of landing, to a windowed recess
with a fire-place; this window, almost alone in the house, should
command a handsome prospect.  Husband and wife must each
possess a studio; on the woman’s sanctuary I hesitate to
dwell, and turn to the man’s.  The walls are shelved
waist-high for books, and the top thus forms a continuous table
running round the wall.  Above are prints, a large map of
the neighbourhood, a Corot and a Claude or two.  The room is
very spacious, and the five tables and two chairs are but as
islands.  One table is for actual work, one close by for
references in use; one, very large, for MSS. or proofs that wait
their turn; one kept clear for an occasion; and the fifth is the
map table, groaning under a collection of large-scale maps and
charts.  Of all books these are the least wearisome to read
and the richest in matter; the course of roads and rivers, the
contour lines and the forests in the maps—the reefs,
soundings, anchors, sailing marks and little pilot-pictures in
the charts—and, in both, the bead-roll of names, make them
of all printed matter the most fit to stimulate and satisfy the
fancy.  The chair in which you write is very low and easy,
and backed into a corner; at one elbow the fire twinkles; close
at the other, if you are a little inhumane, your cage of
silver-bills are twittering into song.</p>
<p>Joined along by a passage, you may reach the great, sunny,
glass-roofed, and tiled gymnasium, at the far end of which, lined
with bright marble, is your plunge and swimming bath, fitted with
a capacious boiler.</p>
<p>The whole loft of the house from end to end makes one
undivided chamber; here are set forth tables on which to model
imaginary or actual countries in putty or plaster, with tools and
hardy pigments; a carpenter’s bench; and a spared corner
for photography, while at the far end a space is kept clear for
playing soldiers.  Two boxes contain the two armies of some
five hundred horse and foot; two others the ammunition of each
side, and a fifth the foot-rules and the three colours of chalk,
with which you lay down, or, after a day’s play, refresh
the outlines of the country; red or white for the two kinds of
road (according as they are suitable or not for the passage of
ordnance), and blue for the course of the obstructing
rivers.  Here I foresee that you may pass much happy time;
against a good adversary a game may well continue for a month;
for with armies so considerable three moves will occupy an
hour.  It will be found to set an excellent edge on this
diversion if one of the players shall, every day or so, write a
report of the operations in the character of army
correspondent.</p>
<p>I have left to the last the little room for winter
evenings.  This should be furnished in warm positive
colours, and sofas and floor thick with rich furs.  The
hearth, where you burn wood of aromatic quality on silver dogs,
tiled round about with Bible pictures; the seats deep and easy; a
single Titian in a gold frame; a white bust or so upon a bracket;
a rack for the journals of the week; a table for the books of the
year; and close in a corner the three shelves full of eternal
books that never weary: Shakespeare, Molière, Montaigne,
Lamb, Sterne, De Musset’s comedies (the one volume open at
<i>Carmosine</i> and the other at <i>Fantasio</i>); the
<i>Arabian Nights</i>, and kindred stories, in Weber’s
solemn volumes; Borrow’s <i>Bible in Spain</i>, the
<i>Pilgrim’s Progress</i>, <i>Guy Mannering</i> and <i>Rob
Roy</i>, <i>Monte Cristo</i> and the <i>Vicomte de
Bragelonne</i>, immortal Boswell sole among biographers, Chaucer,
Herrick, and the <i>State Trials</i>.</p>
<p>The bedrooms are large, airy, with almost no furniture, floors
of varnished wood, and at the bed-head, in case of insomnia, one
shelf of books of a particular and dippable order, such as
<i>Pepys</i>, the <i>Paston Letters</i>, Burt’s <i>Letters
from the Highlands</i>, or the <i>Newgate Calendar</i>. . . .</p>
