
<h2><a id="page51"></a>II<br>
THE OLD PACIFIC CAPITAL</h2>
<h3> <span class="smcap">The Woods and the Pacific</span></h3>
<p><span class="smcap">The</span> Bay of Monterey has been
compared by no less a person than General Sherman to a bent
fishing-hook; and the comparison, if less important than the
march through Georgia, still shows the eye of a soldier for
topography. Santa Cruz sits exposed at the shank; the mouth
of the Salinas river is at the middle of the bend; and Monterey
itself is cosily ensconced beside the barb. Thus the
ancient capital of California faces across the bay, while the
Pacific Ocean, though hidden by low hills and forest, bombards
her left flank and rear with never-dying surf. In front of
the town, the long line of sea-beach trends north and north-west,
and then westward to enclose the bay. The waves which lap
so quietly about the jetties of Monterey grow louder and larger
in the distance; you can see the breakers leaping high and white
by day; at night, the outline of the shore is traced in
transparent silver by the moonlight and the flying foam; and from
all round, even in quiet weather, the distant, thrilling roar of
the Pacific hangs over the coast and the adjacent country like
smoke above a battle.</p>
<p>These long beaches are enticing to the idle man. It
would be hard to find a walk more solitary and at the same time
more exciting to the mind. Crowds of ducks and sea-gulls
hover over the sea. Sandpipers trot in and out by troops
after the retiring waves, trilling together in a chorus of
infinitesimal song. Strange sea-tangles, new to the
European eye, the bones of whales, or sometimes a whole
whale’s carcase, white with carrion-gulls and poisoning the
wind, lie scattered here and there along the sands. The
waves come in slowly, vast and green, curve their translucent
necks, and burst with a surprising uproar, that runs, waxing and
waning, up and down the long key-board of the beach. The
foam of these great ruins mounts in an instant to the ridge of
the sand glacis, swiftly fleets back again, and is met and buried
by the next breaker. The interest is perpetually
fresh. On no other coast that I know shall you enjoy, in
calm, sunny weather, such a spectacle of Ocean’s greatness,
such beauty of changing colour, or such degrees of thunder in the
sound. The very air is more than usually salt by this
Homeric deep.</p>
<p>Inshore, a tract of sand-hills borders on the beach.
Here and there a lagoon, more or less brackish, attracts the
birds and hunters. A rough, undergrowth partially conceals
the sand. The crouching, hardy live-oaks flourish singly or
in thickets—the kind of wood for murderers to crawl
among—and here and there the skirts of the forest extend
downward from the hills with a floor of turf and long aisles of
pine-trees hung with Spaniard’s Beard. Through this
quaint desert the railway cars drew near to Monterey from the
junction at Salinas City—though that and so many other
things are now for ever altered—and it was from here that
you had the first view of the old township lying in the sands,
its white windmills bickering in the chill, perpetual wind, and
the first fogs of the evening drawing drearily around it from the
sea.</p>
<p>The one common note of all this country is the haunting
presence of the ocean. A great faint sound of breakers
follows you high up into the inland cañons; the roar of
water dwells in the clean, empty rooms of Monterey as in a shell
upon the chimney; go where you will, you have but to pause and
listen to hear the voice of the Pacific. You pass out of
the town to the south-west, and mount the hill among
pine-woods. Glade, thicket, and grove surround you.
You follow winding sandy tracks that lead nowhither. You
see a deer; a multitude of quail arises. But the sound of
the sea still follows you as you advance, like that of wind among
the trees, only harsher and stranger to the ear; and when at
length you gain the summit, out breaks on every hand and with
freshened vigour that same unending, distant, whispering rumble
of the ocean; for now you are on the top of Monterey peninsula,
and the noise no longer only mounts to you from behind along the
beach towards Santa Cruz, but from your right also, round by
Chinatown and Pinos lighthouse, and from down before you to the
mouth of the Carmello river. The whole woodland is begirt
with thundering surges. The silence that immediately
surrounds you where you stand is not so much broken as it is
haunted by this distant, circling rumour. It sets your
senses upon edge; you strain your attention; you are clearly and
unusually conscious of small sounds near at hand; you walk
listening like an Indian hunter; and that voice of the Pacific is
a sort of disquieting company to you in your walk.</p>
<p>When once I was in these woods I found it difficult to turn
homeward. All woods lure a rambler onward; but in those of
Monterey it was the surf that particularly invited me to prolong
my walks. I would push straight for the shore where I
thought it to be nearest. Indeed, there was scarce a
direction that would not, sooner or later, have brought me forth
on the Pacific. The emptiness of the woods gave me a sense
of freedom and discovery in these excursions. I never in
all my visits met but one man. He was a Mexican, very dark
of hue, but smiling and fat, and he carried an axe, though his
true business at that moment was to seek for straying
cattle. I asked him what o’clock it was, but he
seemed neither to know nor care; and when he in his turn asked me
for news of his cattle, I showed myself equally
indifferent. We stood and smiled upon each other for a few
seconds, and then turned without a word and took our several ways
across the forest.</p>
<p>One day—I shall never forget it—I had taken a
trail that was new to me. After a while the woods began to
open, the sea to sound nearer hand. I came upon a road,
and, to my surprise, a stile. A step or two farther, and,
without leaving the woods, I found myself among trim
houses. I walked through street after street, parallel and
at right angles, paved with sward and dotted with trees, but
still undeniable streets, and each with its name posted at the
corner, as in a real town. Facing down the main
thoroughfare—“Central Avenue,” as it was
ticketed—I saw an open-air temple, with benches and
sounding-board, as though for an orchestra. The houses were
all tightly shuttered; there was no smoke, no sound but of the
waves, no moving thing. I have never been in any place that
seemed so dreamlike. Pompeii is all in a bustle with
visitors, and its antiquity and strangeness deceive the
imagination; but this town had plainly not been built above a
year or two, and perhaps had been deserted overnight.
Indeed, it was not so much like a deserted town as like a scene
upon the stage by daylight, and with no one on the boards.
The barking of a dog led me at last to the only house still
occupied, where a Scotch pastor and his wife pass the winter
alone in this empty theatre. The place was “The
Pacific Camp Grounds, the Christian Seaside Resort.”
Thither, in the warm season, crowds come to enjoy a life of
teetotalism, religion, and flirtation, which I am willing to
think blameless and agreeable. The neighbourhood at least
is well selected. The Pacific booms in front.
Westward is Point Pinos, with the lighthouse in a wilderness of
sand, where you will find the lightkeeper playing the piano,
making models and bows and arrows, studying dawn and sunrise in
amateur oil-painting, and with a dozen other elegant pursuits and
interests to surprise his brave, old-country rivals. To the
east, and still nearer, you will come upon a space of open down,
a hamlet, a haven among rocks, a world of surge and screaming
sea-gulls. Such scenes are very similar in different
climates; they appear homely to the eyes of all; to me this was
like a dozen spots in Scotland. And yet the boats that ride
in the haven are of strange outlandish design; and, if you walk
into the hamlet, you will behold costumes and faces and hear a
tongue that are unfamiliar to the memory. The joss-stick
burns, the opium pipe is smoked, the floors are strewn with slips
of coloured paper—prayers, you would say, that had somehow
missed their destination—and a man guiding his upright
pencil from right to left across the sheet, writes home the news
of Monterey to the Celestial Empire.</p>
<p>The woods and the Pacific rule between them the climate of
this seaboard region. On the streets of Monterey, when the
air does not smell salt from the one, it will be blowing perfumed
from the resinous tree-tops of the other. For days together
a hot, dry air will overhang the town, close as from an oven, yet
healthful and aromatic in the nostrils. The cause is not
far to seek, for the woods are afire, and the hot wind is blowing
from the hills. These fires are one of the great dangers of
California. I have seen from Monterey as many as three at
the same time, by day a cloud of smoke, by night a red coal of
conflagration in the distance. A little thing will start
them, and, if the wind be favourable, they gallop over miles of
country faster than a horse. The inhabitants must turn out
and work like demons, for it is not only the pleasant groves that
are destroyed; the climate and the soil are equally at stake, and
these fires prevent the rains of the next winter and dry up
perennial fountains. California has been a land of promise
in its time, like Palestine; but if the woods continue so swiftly
to perish, it may become, like Palestine, a land of
desolation.</p>
<p>To visit the woods while they are languidly burning is a
strange piece of experience. The fire passes through the
underbrush at a run. Every here and there a tree flares up
instantaneously from root to summit, scattering tufts of flame,
and is quenched, it seems, as quickly. But this last is
only in semblance. For after this first squib-like
conflagration of the dry moss and twigs, there remains behind a
deep-rooted and consuming fire in the very entrails of the
tree. The resin of the pitch-pine is principally condensed
at the base of the bole and in the spreading roots. Thus,
after the light, showy, skirmishing flames, which are only as the
match to the explosion, have already scampered down the wind into
the distance, the true harm is but beginning for this giant of
the woods. You may approach the tree from one side, and see
it scorched indeed from top to bottom, but apparently survivor of
the peril. Make the circuit, and there, on the other side
of the column, is a clear mass of living coal, spreading like an
ulcer; while underground, to their most extended fibre, the roots
are being eaten out by fire, and the smoke is rising through the
fissures to the surface. A little while, and, without a nod
of warning, the huge pine-tree snaps off short across the ground
and falls prostrate with a crash. Meanwhile the fire
continues its silent business; the roots are reduced to a fine
ash; and long afterwards, if you pass by, you will find the earth
pierced with radiating galleries, and preserving the design of
all these subterranean spurs, as though it were the mould for a
new tree instead of the print of an old one. These
pitch-pines of Monterey are, with the single exception of the
Monterey cypress, the most fantastic of forest trees. No
words can give an idea of the contortion of their growth; they
might figure without change in a circle of the nether hell as
Dante pictured it; and at the rate at which trees grow, and at
which forest fires spring up and gallop through the hills of
California, we may look forward to a time when there will not be
one of them left standing in that land of their nativity.
At least they have not so much to fear from the axe, but perish
by what may be called a natural although a violent death; while
it is man in his short-sighted greed that robs the country of the
nobler redwood. Yet a little while and perhaps all the
hills of seaboard California may be as bald as Tamalpais.</p>
<p>I have an interest of my own in these forest fires, for I came
so near to lynching on one occasion, that a braver man might have
retained a thrill from the experience. I wished to be
certain whether it was the moss, that quaint funereal ornament of
Californian forests, which blazed up so rapidly when the flame
first touched the tree. I suppose I must have been under
the influence of Satan, for instead of plucking off a piece for
my experiment what should I do but walk up to a great pine-tree
in a portion of the wood which had escaped so much as scorching,
strike a match, and apply the flame gingerly to one of the
tassels. The tree went off simply like a rocket; in three
seconds it was a roaring pillar of fire. Close by I could
hear the shouts of those who were at work combating the original
conflagration. I could see the waggon that had brought them
tied to a live oak in a piece of open; I could even catch the
flash of an axe as it swung up through the underwood into the
sunlight. Had any one observed the result of my experiment
my neck was literally not worth a pinch of snuff; after a few
minutes of passionate expostulation I should have been run up to
convenient bough.</p>
<blockquote><div><p>To die for faction is a common evil;<br>
But to be hanged for nonsense is the devil.</p>
</div></blockquote>
<p>I have run repeatedly, but never as I ran that day. At
night I went out of town, and there was my own particular fire,
quite distinct from the other, and burning as I thought with even
greater vigour.</p>
<p>But it is the Pacific that exercises the most direct and
obvious power upon the climate. At sunset, for months
together, vast, wet, melancholy fogs arise and come shoreward
from the ocean. From the hill-top above Monterey the scene
is often noble, although it is always sad. The upper air is
still bright with sunlight; a glow still rests upon the Gabelano
Peak; but the fogs are in possession of the lower levels; they
crawl in scarves among the sandhills; they float, a little
higher, in clouds of a gigantic size and often of a wild
configuration; to the south, where they have struck the seaward
shoulder of the mountains of Santa Lucia, they double back and
spire up skyward like smoke. Where their shadow touches,
colour dies out of the world. The air grows chill and
deadly as they advance. The trade-wind freshens, the trees
begin to sigh, and all the windmills in Monterey are whirling and
creaking and filling their cisterns with the brackish water of
the sands. It takes but a little while till the invasion is
complete. The sea, in its lighter order, has submerged the
earth. Monterey is curtained in for the night in thick,
wet, salt, and frigid clouds, so to remain till day returns; and
before the sun’s rays they slowly disperse and retreat in
broken squadrons to the bosom of the sea. And yet often
when the fog is thickest and most chill, a few steps out of the
town and up the slope, the night will be dry and warm and full of
inland perfume.</p>
<h3> <span class="smcap">Mexicans, Americans, and
Indians</span></h3>
<p>The history of Monterey has yet to be written. Founded
by Catholic missionaries, a place of wise beneficence to Indians,
a place of arms, a Mexican capital continually wrested by one
faction from another, an American capital when the first House of
Representatives held its deliberations, and then falling lower
and lower from the capital of the State to the capital of a
county, and from that again, by the loss of its charter and town
lands, to a mere bankrupt village, its rise and decline is
typical of that of all Mexican institutions and even Mexican
families in California.</p>
<p>Nothing is stranger in that strange State than the rapidity
with which the soil has changed-hands. The Mexicans, you
may say, are all poor and landless, like their former capital;
and yet both it and they hold themselves apart and preserve their
ancient customs and something of their ancient air.</p>
<p>The town, when I was there, was a place of two or three
streets, economically paved with sea-sand, and two or three
lanes, which were watercourses in the rainy season, and were, at
all times, rent up by fissures four or five feet deep.
There were no street lights. Short sections of wooden
sidewalk only added to the dangers of the night, for they were
often high above the level of the roadway, and no one could tell
where they would be likely to begin or end. The houses
were, for the most part, built of unbaked adobe brick, many of
them old for so new a country, some of very elegant proportions,
with low, spacious, shapely rooms, and walls so thick that the
heat of summer never dried them to the heart. At the
approach of the rainy season a deathly chill and a graveyard
smell began to hang about the lower floors; and diseases of the
chest are common and fatal among house-keeping people of either
sex.</p>
<p>There was no activity but in and around the saloons, where
people sat almost all day long playing cards. The smallest
excursion was made on horseback. You would scarcely ever
see the main street without a horse or two tied to posts, and
making a fine figure with their Mexican housings. It struck
me oddly to come across some of the <i>Cornhill</i> illustrations
to Mr. Blackmore’s <i>Erema</i>, and see all the characters
astride on English saddles. As a matter of fact, an English
saddle is a rarity even in San Francisco, and, you may say, a
thing unknown in all the rest of California. In a place so
exclusively Mexican as Monterey, you saw not only Mexican saddles
but true Vaquero riding—men always at the hand-gallop up
hill and down dale, and round the sharpest corner, urging their
horses with cries and gesticulations and cruel rotatory spurs,
checking them dead with a touch, or wheeling them
right-about-face in a square yard. The type of face and
character of bearing are surprisingly un-American. The
first ranged from something like the pure Spanish, to something,
in its sad fixity, not unlike the pure Indian, although I do not
suppose there was one pure blood of either race in all the
country. As for the second, it was a matter of perpetual
surprise to find, in that world of absolutely mannerless
Americans, a people full of deportment, solemnly courteous, and
doing all things with grace and decorum. In dress they ran
to colour and bright sashes. Not even the most Americanised
could always resist the temptation to stick a red rose into his
hat-band. Not even the most Americanised would descend to
wear the vile dress hat of civilisation. Spanish was the
language of the streets. It was difficult to get along
without a word or two of that language for an occasion. The
only communications in which the population joined were with a
view to amusement. A weekly public ball took place with
great etiquette, in addition to the numerous fandangoes in
private houses. There was a really fair amateur brass
band. Night after night serenaders would be going about the
street, sometimes in a company and with several instruments and
voice together, sometimes severally, each guitar before a
different window. It was a strange thing to lie awake in
nineteenth-century America, and hear the guitar accompany, and
one of these old, heart-breaking Spanish love-songs mount into
the night air, perhaps in a deep baritone, perhaps in that
high-pitched, pathetic, womanish alto which is so common among
Mexican men, and which strikes on the unaccustomed ear as
something not entirely human but altogether sad.</p>
<p>The town, then, was essentially and wholly Mexican; and yet
almost all the land in the neighbourhood was held by Americans,
and it was from the same class, numerically so small, that the
principal officials were selected. This Mexican and that
Mexican would describe to you his old family estates, not one
rood of which remained to him. You would ask him how that
came about, and elicit some tangled story back-foremost, from
which you gathered that the Americans had been greedy like
designing men, and the Mexicans greedy like children, but no
other certain fact. Their merits and their faults
contributed alike to the ruin of the former landholders. It
is true they were improvident, and easily dazzled with the sight
of ready money; but they were gentlefolk besides, and that in a
way which curiously unfitted them to combat Yankee craft.
Suppose they have a paper to sign, they would think it a
reflection on the other party to examine the terms with any great
minuteness; nay, suppose them to observe some doubtful clause, it
is ten to one they would refuse from delicacy to object to
it. I know I am speaking within the mark, for I have seen
such a case occur, and the Mexican, in spite of the advice of his
lawyer, has signed the imperfect paper like a lamb. To have
spoken in the matter, he said, above all to have let the other
party guess that he had seen a lawyer, would have “been
like doubting his word.” The scruple sounds oddly to
one of ourselves, who have been brought up to understand all
business as a competition in fraud, and honesty itself to be a
virtue which regards the carrying out but not the creation of
agreements. This single unworldly trait will account for
much of that revolution of which we are speaking. The
Mexicans have the name of being great swindlers, but certainly
the accusation cuts both ways. In a contest of this sort,
the entire booty would scarcely have passed into the hands of the
more scupulous race.</p>
<p>Physically the Americans have triumphed; but it is not
entirely seen how far they have themselves been morally
conquered. This is, of course, but a part of a part of an
extraordinary problem now in the course of being solved in the
various States of the American Union. I am reminded of an
anecdote. Some years ago, at a great sale of wine, all the
odd lots were purchased by a grocer in a small way in the old
town of Edinburgh. The agent had the curiosity to visit him
some time after and inquire what possible use he could have for
such material. He was shown, by way of answer, a huge vat
where all the liquors, from humble Gladstone to imperial Tokay,
were fermenting together. “And what,” he asked,
“do you propose to call this?” “I’m
no very sure,” replied the grocer, “but I think
it’s going to turn out port.” In the older
Eastern States, I think we may say that this hotch-potch of races
in going to turn out English, or thereabout. But the
problem is indefinitely varied in other zones. The elements
are differently mingled in the south, in what we may call the
Territorial belt and in the group of States on the Pacific
coast. Above all, in these last, we may look to see some
monstrous hybrid—Whether good or evil, who shall forecast?
but certainly original and all their own. In my little
restaurant at Monterey, we have sat down to table day after day,
a Frenchman, two Portuguese, an Italian, a Mexican, and a
Scotchman: we had for common visitors an American from Illinois,
a nearly pure blood Indian woman, and a naturalised Chinese; and
from time to time a Switzer and a German came down from country
ranches for the night. No wonder that the Pacific coast is
a foreign land to visitors from the Eastern States, for each race
contributes something of its own. Even the despised Chinese
have taught the youth of California, none indeed of their
virtues, but the debasing use of opium. And chief among
these influences is that of the Mexicans.</p>
<p>The Mexicans although in the State are out of it. They
still preserve a sort of international independence, and keep
their affairs snug to themselves. Only four or five years
ago Vasquez, the bandit, his troops being dispersed and the hunt
too hot for him in other parts of California, returned to his
native Monterey, and was seen publicly in her streets and
saloons, fearing no man. The year that I was there, there
occurred two reputed murders. As the Montereyans are
exceptionally vile speakers of each other and of every one behind
his back, it is not possible for me to judge how much truth there
may have been in these reports; but in the one case every one
believed, and in the other some suspected, that there had been
foul play; and nobody dreamed for an instant of taking the
authorities into their counsel. Now this is, of course,
characteristic enough of the Mexicans; but it is a noteworthy
feature that all the Americans in Monterey acquiesced without a
word in this inaction. Even when I spoke to them upon the
subject, they seemed not to understand my surprise; they had
forgotten the traditions of their own race and upbringing, and
become, in a word, wholly Mexicanised.</p>
<p>Again, the Mexicans, having no ready money to speak of, rely
almost entirely in their business transactions upon each
other’s worthless paper. Pedro the penniless pays you
with an I O U from the equally penniless Miguel. It is a
sort of local currency by courtesy. Credit in these parts
has passed into a superstition. I have seen a strong,
violent man struggling for months to recover a debt, and getting
nothing but an exchange of waste paper. The very
storekeepers are averse to asking for cash payments, and are more
surprised than pleased when they are offered. They fear
there must be something under it, and that you mean to withdraw
your custom from them. I have seen the enterprising chemist
and stationer begging me with fervour to let my account run on,
although I had my purse open in my hand; and partly from the
commonness of the case, partly from some remains of that generous
old Mexican tradition which made all men welcome to their tables,
a person may be notoriously both unwilling and unable to pay, and
still find credit for the necessaries of life in the stores of
Monterey. Now this villainous habit of living upon
“tick” has grown into Californian nature. I do
not mean that the American and European storekeepers of Monterey
are as lax as Mexicans; I mean that American farmers in many
parts of the State expect unlimited credit, and profit by it in
the meanwhile, without a thought for consequences. Jew
storekeepers have already learned the advantage to be gained from
this; they lead on the farmer into irretrievable indebtedness,
and keep him ever after as their bond-slave hopelessly grinding
in the mill. So the whirligig of time brings in its
revenges, and except that the Jew knows better than to foreclose,
you may see Americans bound in the same chains with which they
themselves had formerly bound the Mexican. It seems as if
certain sorts of follies, like certain sorts of grain, were
natural to the soil rather than to the race that holds and tills
it for the moment.</p>
<p>In the meantime, however, the Americans rule in Monterey
County. The new county seat, Salinas City, in the bald,
corn-bearing plain under the Gabelano Peak, is a town of a purely
American character. The land is held, for the most part, in
those enormous tracts which are another legacy of Mexican days,
and form the present chief danger and disgrace of California; and
the holders are mostly of American or British birth. We
have here in England no idea of the troubles and inconveniences
which flow from the existence of these large
landholders—land-thieves, land-sharks, or land-grabbers,
they are more commonly and plainly called. Thus the
townlands of Monterey are all in the hands of a single man.
How they came there is an obscure, vexatious question, and,
rightly or wrongly, the man is hated with a great hatred.
His life has been repeatedly in danger. Not very long ago,
I was told, the stage was stopped and examined three evenings in
succession by disguised horsemen thirsting for his blood. A
certain house on the Salinas road, they say, he always passes in
his buggy at full speed, for the squatter sent him warning long
ago. But a year since he was publicly pointed out for death
by no less a man than Mr. Dennis Kearney. Kearney is a man
too well known in California, but a word of explanation is
required for English readers. Originally an Irish dray-man,
he rose, by his command of bad language, to almost dictatorial
authority in the State; throned it there for six months or so,
his mouth full of oaths, gallowses, and conflagrations; was first
snuffed out last winter by Mr. Coleman, backed by his San
Francisco Vigilantes and three gatling guns; completed his own
ruin by throwing in his lot with the grotesque Green-backer
party; and had at last to be rescued by his old enemies, the
police, out of the hands of his rebellious followers. It
was while he was at the top of his fortune that Kearney visited
Monterey with his battle-cry against Chinese labour, the railroad
monopolists, and the land-thieves; and his one articulate counsel
to the Montereyans was to “hang David Jacks.”
Had the town been American, in my private opinion, this would
have been done years ago. Land is a subject on which there
is no jesting in the West, and I have seen my friend the lawyer
drive out of Monterey to adjust a competition of titles with the
face of a captain going into battle and his Smith-and-Wesson
convenient to his hand.</p>
<p>On the ranche of another of these landholders you may find our
old friend, the truck system, in full operation. Men live
there, year in year out, to cut timber for a nominal wage, which
is all consumed in supplies. The longer they remain in this
desirable service the deeper they will fall in debt—a
burlesque injustice in a new country, where labour should be
precious, and one of those typical instances which explains the
prevailing discontent and the success of the demagogue
Kearney.</p>
<p>In a comparison between what was and what is in California,
the praisers of times past will fix upon the Indians of
Carmel. The valley drained by the river so named is a true
Californian valley, bare, dotted with chaparal, overlooked by
quaint, unfinished hills. The Carmel runs by many pleasant
farms, a clear and shallow river, loved by wading kine; and at
last, as it is falling towards a quicksand and the great Pacific,
passes a ruined mission on a hill. From the mission church
the eye embraces a great field of ocean, and the ear is filled
with a continuous sound of distant breakers on the shore.
But the day of the Jesuit has gone by, the day of the Yankee has
succeeded, and there is no one left to care for the converted
savage. The church is roofless and ruinous, sea-breezes and
sea-fogs, and the alternation of the rain and sunshine, daily
widening the breaches and casting the crockets from the
wall. As an antiquity in this new land, a quaint specimen
of missionary architecture, and a memorial of good deeds, it had
a triple claim to preservation from all thinking people; but
neglect and abuse have been its portion. There is no sign
of American interference, save where a headboard has been torn
from a grave to be a mark for pistol bullets. So it is with
the Indians for whom it was erected. Their lands, I was
told, are being yearly encroached upon by the neighbouring
American proprietor, and with that exception no man troubles his
head for the Indians of Carmel. Only one day in the year,
the day before our Guy Fawkes, the <i>padre</i> drives over the
hill from Monterey; the little sacristy, which is the only
covered portion of the church, is filled with seats and decorated
for the service; the Indians troop together, their bright dresses
contrasting with their dark and melancholy faces; and there,
among a crowd of somewhat unsympathetic holiday-makers, you may
hear God served with perhaps more touching circumstances than in
any other temple under heaven. An Indian, stone-blind and
about eighty years of age, conducts the singing; other Indians
compose the choir; yet they have the Gregorian music at their
finger ends, and pronounce the Latin so correctly that I could
follow the meaning as they sang. The pronunciation was odd
and nasal, the singing hurried and staccato. “In
sæcula sæculoho-horum,” they went, with a
vigorous aspirate to every additional syllable. I have
never seen faces more vividly lit up with joy than the faces of
these Indian singers. It was to them not only the worship
of God, nor an act by which they recalled and commemorated better
days, but was besides an exercise of culture, where all they knew
of art and letters was united and expressed. And it made a
man’s heart sorry for the good fathers of yore who had
taught them to dig and to reap, to read and to sing, who had
given them European mass-books which they still preserve and
study in their cottages, and who had now passed away from all
authority and influence in that land—to be succeeded by
greedy land-thieves and sacrilegious pistol-shots. So ugly
a thing may our Anglo-Saxon Protestantism appear beside the
doings of the Society of Jesus.</p>
<p>But revolution in this world succeeds to revolution. All
that I say in this paper is in a paulo-past tense. The
Monterey of last year exists no longer. A huge hotel has
sprung up in the desert by the railway. Three sets of
diners sit down successively to table. Invaluable toilettes
figure along the beach and between the live oaks; and Monterey is
advertised in the newspapers, and posted in the waiting-rooms at
railway stations, as a resort for wealth and fashion. Alas
for the little town! it is not strong enough to resist the
influence of the flaunting caravanserai, and the poor, quaint,
penniless native gentlemen of Monterey must perish, like a lower
race, before the millionaire vulgarians of the Big Bonanza.</p>
<p style="text-align: right">[1880.]</p>
</div><!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
